<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:poem">
		<section id="book-12" epub:type="division">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="trojan-war" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Trojan War</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Preparations are making by the Greeks for the hostile invasion of Troy⁠—Iphigenia, the daughter of Agamemnon, is about to be sacrificed to Diana, when her life is saved by the indulgent goddess, and a hind substituted in her stead.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Priam, to whom the story was unknown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As dead, deplored his metamorphosed son.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cenotaph his name and title kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hector round the tomb, with all his brothers, wept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This pious office Paris did not share,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Absent alone, and author of the war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, for the Spartan queen, the Grecians drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To avenge the rape, and Asia to subdue.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A thousand ships were mann’d to sail the sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor had their just resentments found delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not the winds and waves opposed their way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Aulis, with united powers, they meet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there, cross winds or calms detain’d the fleet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, while they raise an altar on the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Jove with solemn sacrifice adore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A boding sign the priests and people see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A snake of size immense ascends a tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the leafy summit spied a nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which o’er her callow young a sparrow press’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eight were the birds, unfledged; their mother flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hover’d round her care, but still in view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the fierce reptile first devour’d the brood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then seized the fluttering dam, and drank her blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This dire ostent the fearful people view;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calchas alone, by Phoebus taught, foreknew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What heaven decreed; and with a smiling glance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus gratulates to Greece her happy chance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Oh Argives, we shall conquer; Troy is ours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But long delays shall first afflict our powers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nine years of labour the nine birds portend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tenth shall in the town’s destruction end.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The serpent, which his maw obscene had fill’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The branches in his curl’d embraces held;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, as in spires he stood, he turn’d to stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stony snake retain’d the figure still his own.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet, not for this, the wind-bound navy weigh’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slack were their sails, and Neptune disobey’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some thought him loth the town should be destroy’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose building had his hands divine employ’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not so the seer, who knew, and known foreshow’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The virgin Phoebe, with a virgin’s blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must first be reconciled. The common cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prevail’d, and pity yielding to the laws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair Jphigenia, the devoted maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was, by the weeping priests, in linen robes array’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All mourn her fate, but no relief appear’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The royal victim bound, the knife already rear’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that offended power, who caused their wo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Relenting ceased her wrath, and stopp’d the coming blow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mist before the ministers she cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in the virgin’s room, a hind she placed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The oblation slain, and Phoebe reconciled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The storm was hush’d, and dimpled ocean smiled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A favourable gale arose from shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to the port desired the Grecian galleys, bore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="house-of-fame" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">House of Fame</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The goddess Fame reports through the whole world the invasion of Troy⁠—Protesilaus, who first lands on the hostile shore, is slain by Hector.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Full in themidst of this created space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between heaven, earth, and skies, there stands a place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confining on all three, with triple bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence all things, though remote, are view’d around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thither bring their undulating sound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The palace of loud Fame, her seat of power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Placed on the summit of a lofty tower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand winding entries long and wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receive of fresh reports a flowing tide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand crannies in the walls are made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor gate, nor bars, exclude the busy trade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis built of brass, the better to diffuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spreading sounds, and multiply the news;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where echoes in repeated echoes play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mart for ever full, and open night and day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor silence is within, nor voice express,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But a deaf noise of sounds, that never cease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confused, and chiding, like the hollow roar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of tides receding from the insulted shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or like the broken thunder heard from far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Jove to distance drives the rolling war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The courts are fill’d with a tumultuous din</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of crowds, or issuing forth, or entering in;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thoroughfare of news, where some devise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Things never heard, some mingle truth with lies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The troubled air with empty sounds they beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intent to hear, and eager to repeat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Error sits brooding there, with added train</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of vain credulity, and joys as vain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suspicion, with sedition join’d, are near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rumours raised, and murmurs mix’d. and panic fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fame sits aloft, and sees the subject ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seas about, and skies above; inquiring all around.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The goddess gives the alarm, and soon is known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Grecian fleet descending on the town.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fix’d on defence, the Trojans are not slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To guard their shore from an expected foe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They meet in fight. By Hector’s fatal hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Protesilaus falls, and bites the strand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which with expense of blood the Grecians won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And proved the strength unknown of Priam’s son:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to their cost the Trojan leaders felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Grecian heroes, and what deaths they dealt.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="story-of-cycnus" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Story of Cycnus</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Cycnus, a son of Neptune, and invulnerable in every part of his body, is at length strangled by Achilles, who strips him of his armour, when he is changed into a swan.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>From these first onsets, the Sigaean shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was strew’d with carcasses, and stain’d with gore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neptunian Cycnus troops of Greeks had slain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles in his car had scoured the plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And clear’d the Trojan ranks; where’er he fought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cycnus, or Hector, through the fields he sought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cycnus he found; on him his force essay’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Hector was to the. tenth year delay’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His white maned steeds, that bow’d beneath the yoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cheer’d to courage, with a gentle stroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then urged his fiery chariot on the foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rising shook his lance, in act to throw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But first, he cried, “Oh youth, be proud to bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy death, ennobled by Pelides’ spear.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lance pursued the voice without delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor did the whizzing weapon miss the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But pierced his cuirass, with such fury sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sign’d his bosom with a purple dint.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this the seed of Neptune: “Goddess born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ornament, not use, these arms are worn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This helm, and heavy buckler, I can spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As only decorations of the war;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Mars is arm’d for glory, not for need.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis somewhat more from Neptune to proceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than from a daughter of the sea to spring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy sire is mortal, mine is ocean’s king.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Secure of death, I should contemn thy dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though naked, and impassable depart.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said, and threw; the trembling weapon pass’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through nine bull hides, each under other placed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On his broad shield, and stuck within the last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles wrench’d it out, and sent again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hostile gift: the hostile gift was vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He tried a third, a tough, well-chosen spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The inviolable body stood sincere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though Cycnus then did no defence provide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But scornful offer’d his unshielded side.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not otherwise the impatient hero fared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than as a bull encompass’d with a guard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the circus roars, provoked from far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By sight of scarlet and a sanguine war:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They quit their ground; his bended horns elude;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain pursuing, and in vain pursued.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Before to further fight he would advance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stood considering, and survey’d his lance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doubts if he wielded not a wooden spear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without a point: he look’d; the point was there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“This is my hand, and this my lance,” he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“By which so many thousand foes are dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh whither is their usual virtue fled!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had it once; and the Lyrnessian wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Tenedos, confess’d it in their fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy streams, Caicus, rolled a crimson flood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Thebes ran red with her own natives’ blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twice Telephus employ’d their piercing steel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wound him first, and afterward to heal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vigour of this arm was never vain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that my wonted prowess I retain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Witness these heaps of slaughter on the plain.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said; and, doubtful of his former deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So some new trial of his force proceeds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He chose Menaetes from among the rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At him he launch’d his spear, and pierced his breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the hard earth the Lycian knock’d his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lay supine, and forth the spirit fled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then thus the hero: “Neither can I blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hand or javelin; both are still the same:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same I will employ against«this foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wish but with the same success to throw.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So spoke the chief; and while he spoke he threw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weapon with unerring fury flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At his left shoulder aim’d: nor entrance found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But back, as from a rock, with swift rebound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Harmless return’d: a bloody mark appear’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, with false joy, the flatter’d hero cheer’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wound there was none; the blood that was in view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lance before from slain Menaetes drew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Headlong he leaps from off his lofty car,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in close fight on foot renews the war:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Raging with high disdain, repeats his blows:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor shield nor armour can their force oppose:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Huge cantlets of his buckler strew the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no defence in his bored arms is found:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on his flesh no wound or blood is seen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sword itself is blunted on the skin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This vain attempt the chief no longer bears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But round his hollow temples and his ears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His buckler beats: the son of Neptune, stunn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With these repeated buffets, quits his ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sickly sweat succeeds, and shades of night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inverted nature swims before his sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The insulting victor presses on the more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And treads the steps the vanquished trod before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor rest nor respite gives. A stone there lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind his trembling foe, and stopp’d his way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles took the advantage which he found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erturn’d, and push’d him backward on the ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His buckler held him under, while he press’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With both his knees above his panting breast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unlaced his helm: about his chin the twist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He tied; and soon the strangled soul dismiss’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With eager haste he went to strip the dead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vanish’d body from his arms was fled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sea-god sire, to immortalize his frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had turn’d it to the bird that bears his name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A truce succeeds the labours of this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And arms suspended with a long delay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Trojan walls are kept with watch and ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Greeks before their trenches mount the guard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The feast approach’d, when to the blue-eyed maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His vows for Cycnus slain the victor paid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a white heifer on her altar laid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The reeking entrails on the fire they threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the gods the grateful odour flew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven had its part in sacrifice; the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was broil’d and roasted foi»the future feast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chief invited guests were set around;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, hunger first assuaged, the bowls were crown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in deep draughts their cares and labours drown’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mellow harp did not their ears employ;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mute was all the warlike symphony:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discourse, the food of souls, was their delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pleasing chat prolong’d the summer’s night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The subject, deeds of arms, and valour shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or on the Trojan side, or on their own:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dangers undertaken, fame achieved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They talk’d by turns⁠—the talk by turns relieved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What things but these could fierce Achilles tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or what could fierce Achilles hear so well?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last great act perform’d, of Cycnus slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did most the martial audience entertain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wondering to find a body free by fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From steel, and which could ev’n that steel rebate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amazed, their admiration they renew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scarce Pelides could believe it true.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="story-of-caeneus" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Story of Caeneus</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The nymph Caenis, having suffered violence from Neptune, prevails on her ravisher to change her sex, and make her in vulnerable.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then Nestor thus: “What once this age has known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In fated Cycnus, and in him alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These eyes have seen in Caeneus long before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose body not a thousand swords could bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caeneus in courage and in strength excell’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still his Othrys with his fame is fill’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what did most his martial deeds adorn⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though since he changed his sex, a woman born.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A novelty so strange, and full of fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His listening audience ask’d him to relate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles thus commends their common suit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Oh father, first for prudence in repute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell, with that eloquence so much thy own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thou hast heard, or what of Caeneus known:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What was he; whence his change of sex begun:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What trophies, join’d in wars with thee, he won:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who conquer’d him; and in what fatal strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The youth, without a wound, could lose his life?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Neleides then: “Though tardy age and time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have shrunk my sinews and decay’d my prime;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though much I have forgotten of my store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, not exhausted, I remember more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all that arms achieved, or peace design’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That action still is fresher in my mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than aught beside. If reverend age can give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To faith a sanction, in my third I live.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>” ’Twas in my second century I survey’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young; Caenis, then a fair Thessali?n maid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caenis the bright, was born to high command;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A princess, and a native of thy land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Divine Achilles: every tongue proclaim’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her beauty, and her eyes all hearts inflamed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peleus, thy sire, perhaps had sought her bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the rest; but he had either led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy mother then, or was by promise tied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she to him, and all, alike her love denied.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“It was her fortune once to take her way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the sandy margin of the sea:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The power of ocean view’d her as she pass’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, loved as soon as seen, by force embraced:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then thus, transported, to the nymph he cried:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Ask what thou wilt, no prayer shall be denied:’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This also fame relates. The haughty fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who not the rape ev’n of a god could bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This answer, proud, return’d: ‘To mighty wrongs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mighty recompense, of right, belongs:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me no more to suffer such a shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But change the woman for a better name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One gift for all:’ she said; and while she spoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stern, majestic, manly tone she took:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man she was: and, as the godhead swore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Caeneus turn’d, who Caenis was before.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To this the lover adds, without request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No force of steel should violate his breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glad of the gift, the new-made warrior goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And arms among the Greeks, and longs for equal foes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="skirmish-between-the-centaurs-and-lapithites" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Skirmish Between the Centaurs and Lapithites</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The marriage of Pirithous, king of the Lapithae, with Hippodamia, is rendered memorable by a furious contest with their centaur guests, who endeavour to seize the bride, but are defeated.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Now brave Pirithous, bold Ixion’s son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The love of fair Hippodame had won.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cloud begotten race, half men, half beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invited, came to grace the nuptial feast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a cool cave’s recess the treat was made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose entrance trees with spreading boughs o’ershade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They sat; and, sirmmon’d by the bridegroom, came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mix with those the Lapithaean name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor wanted I. The roofs with joy resound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, ‘Hymen, Io Hymen,’ rung around.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Raised altars shone with holy fires: the bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lovely herself, (and lovely, by her side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bevy of bright nymphs, with sober grace,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came glittering like a star, and took her place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her heavenly form beheld, all wish’d her joy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And little wanted; but in vain their wishes all employ.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For one, most brutal of the brutal brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or whether wine or beauty fired his blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or both at once, beheld with joyful eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bride, at once resolved to make his prize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down went the board; and, fastening on her hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seized with sudden force the frighted fair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas Eurytus began: his bestial kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His crime pursued; and each, as pleased his mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or her whom chance presented, took: the feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An image of a taken town express’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The cave resounds with female shrieks; we rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mad with revenge, to make a swift reprise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Theseus first: ‘What phrensy has possess’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh Eurytus,’ he cried, ‘thy brutal breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wrong Pirithous, and not him alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But while I live, two friends conjoin’d in one?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To justify his threat, he thrusts aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crowd of centaurs, and redeems the bride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The monster naught replied; for words were vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deeds could only deeds unjust maintain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But answers with his hand, and forward press’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With blows redoubled, on his face and breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An ample goblet stood, of antique mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rough with figures of the rising gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hero snatch’d it up, and toss’d in air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full at the front of the foul ravisher:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He falls, and falling, vomits forth a flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wine, and foam, and brains, and mingled blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half roaring, and half neighing, through the hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Arms! arms!’ the double-form’d with fury call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wreak their brother’s death: a medley flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bowls and jars at first supply the fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once instruments of feasts, but now of fate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wine animates their rage, and arms their hate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Bold Amycus from the robb’d vestry brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chalices of heaven, and holy things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of precious weight: a sconce that hung on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tapers fill’d, to light the sacristy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Torn from the cord, with his unhallow’d hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He threw amid the Lapithaean band.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Celadon the ruin fell, and left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His face of feature, and of form bereft:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, when some brawny sacrificer knocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before an altar led, an offer’d ox,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyeballs, rooted out, are thrown to ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His nose, dismantled, in his mouth is found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His jaws, cheeks, front, one undistinguished wound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“This Belates, the avenger, could not brook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, by the foot, a maple board he took,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hurl’d at Amycus: his chin it bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against his chest, and down the centaur sent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom, sputtering bloody teeth, the second blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his drawn sword despatch’d to shades below.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Grineus was near, and cast a furious look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the side altar, censed with sacred smoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bright with flaming fires: ‘The gods,’ he cried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Have with their holy trade our hands supplied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why use we not their gifts?’ Then from the floor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An altar stone he heaved, with all the load it bore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Altar, and altar’s freight, together flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where thickest throng’d the Lapithaean crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at once Broteas and Oryus slew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oryus’ mother, Mycale, was known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down from her sphere to draw the labouring moon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Exadius cried: ‘Unpunish’d shall not go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This fact, if arms are found against the foe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He look’d about, where on a pine were spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The votive horns of a stag’s branching head:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Grineus these he throws; so just they fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the sharp antlers stuck in either eye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breathless and blind he fell, with blood besmear’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyeballs, beaten out, hung dangling on his beard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fierce Rha3tus from the hearth a burning brand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Selects, and whirling waves, till from his hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fire took flame, then dash’d it on the right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On fair Charaxus’ temples, near the sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whistling pest came on, and pierced the bone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And caught the yellow hair, that shrivell’d while it shone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caught, like dry stubble fired, or like seerwood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet from the wound ensued no purple flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But look’d a bubbling mass of frying blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His blazing locks sent forth a crackling sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hiss’d, like red-hot iron within the smithy drown’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wounded warrior shook his flaming hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then (what a team of horse could hardly rear)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He heaves the threshold stone, but could not throw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weight itself forbad the threaten’d blow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, dropping from his lifted arms, came down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full on Cometes’ head, and crush’d his crown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor Rhaetus then restrained his joy, but said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘So by their fellows may our foes be sped:’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with redoubled strokes he plies his head:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The burning lever not deludes his pains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But drives the batter’d scull within the brains.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus flush’d, the conqueror, with force renew’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Evagrus, Dryas, Corythus, pursued.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First Corythus, with downy cheeks, he slew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose fall when fierce Evagrus had ir view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cried: ‘What palm is from a beardless prey?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rhaetus prevents what more he had to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drove within his mouth the fiery death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which enter’d hissing in, and choked his breath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Dryas next he flew: but weary chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No longer would the same success advance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For while he whirl’d in fiery circles round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brand, a sharpen’d stake strong Dryas found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the shoulder’s joint inflicts the wound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weapon stuck, which, roaring out with pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He drew; nor longer durst the fight maintain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But turn’d his back, for fear, and fled amain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him fled Orneus, with like dread possess’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thaumas, and Medon, wounded in the breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Mermeros, in the late race renown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now limping ran, and tardy, with his wound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pholus and Melaneous from fight withdrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Abas maim’d, who boars encountering slew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Augur Astylos, whose art in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From fight dissuaded the four-footed train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now beat the hoof with Nessus on the plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to his fellow cried: ‘Be safely slow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy death deferr’d is due to great Alcides’ bow.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Meantime strong Dryas urged his chance so well.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Lycidas, Areos, Imbreus, fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All one by one, and fighting face to face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crenaeus fled, to fall with more disgrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, fearful, while he look’d behind, he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between his nose and front, the blow before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the noise and tumult of the fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snoring, and drunk with wine, Aphidas lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ev’n then the bowl within his hand he kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on a bear’s rough hide securely slept:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him Phorbas with his flying dart transfix’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Take thy next draught with Stygian waters mix’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sleep thy fill,’ the insulting victor cried:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surprised with death unfelt, the centaur died:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ruddy vomit, as he breathed his soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repass’d his throat, and fill’d his empty bowl.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I saw Petraeus’ arms employ’d around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A well-grown oak, to root it from the ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This way and that he wrench’d the fibrous bands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trunk was like a sapling in his hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still obey’d the bent: while thus he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pirithous’ dart drove on, and nail’d him to the wood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lycus and Chromis fell, by him oppress’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Helops and Dictys added to the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A nobler palm: Helops through either ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transfix’d, received the penetrating spear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Dictys saw, and, seized with sudden fright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leap’d headlong from the hill of steepy height,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crush’d an ash beneath, that could not bear his weight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shatter’d tree receives his fall, and strikes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within his full-blown paunch the sharpen’d spikes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strong Aphareus had heaved a mighty stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fragment of a rock, and would have thrown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Theseus, with a club of harden’d oak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cubit-bone of the bold centaur broke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And left him maim’d; nor seconded the stroke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then leap’d on tall Bianor’s back; (who bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No mortal burden but his own before;)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press’d with his knees his sides: the double man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His speed with spurs increased, unwilling ran.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One hand the hero fasten’d on his locks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His other plied him with repeated strokes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The club rang round his ears and batter’d brows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He falls, and, lashing up his heels, his rider throws.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The same Herculean arms Nedymnus wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lay by him Lycotas on the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hippasus, whose beard his breast invades;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Ripheus, hunter of the woodland shades;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Tereus, used with mountain bears to strive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from their dens to draw the indignant beasts alive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Demoleon could not bear this hateful sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the long fortune of the Athenian knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But pull’d with all his force, to disengage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From earth a pine, the product of an age:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The root stuck fast: the broken trunk he sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Theseus: Theseus frustrates his intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leaps aside; by Pallas warn’d the blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shun: (for so he said, and we believed it so.)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet not in vain the enormous weight was cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Crantor’s body sunder’d at the waist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy father’s ‘squire, Achilles, and his care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom, conquer’d in the Pelopeian war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their king, his present ruin to prevent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pledge of peace implored, to Peleus sent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thy sire, with grieving eyes, beheld his fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cried, ‘Not long, loved Crantor, shalt thou wait</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy vow’d revenge.’ At once he said, and threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His ashen spear, which quiver’d as it flew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all his force and all his soul applied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sharp point enter’d in the centaur’s side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both hands to wrench it out the monster join’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wrench’d it output left the steel behind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stuck in his lungs it stood: enraged he rears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hoofs, and down to ground thy father bears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus trampled under foot, his shield defends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His head; his other hand the lance portends:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ev’n while he lay extended on the dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sped the centaur with one single thrust:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two more his lance before transfix’d from far;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And two his sword had slain in closer war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To these was added Dorylas, who spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bull’s two goring horns round his head:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With these he push’d: in blood already died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him fearless I approach’d, and thus defied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Now, monster, now by proof it shall appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether thy horns are sharper, or my spear.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this, I threw: for want of other ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lifted up his hand, his front to guard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hand it pass’d, and fix’d it to his brow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loud shouts of ours attend the lucky blow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him Peleus finish’d, with a second wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which through the navel pierced: he reel’d around.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dragg’d his dangling bowels on the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trod what he dragg’d, and what he trod, he crush’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his mother earth with empty belly rush’d.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="story-of-cyllarus-and-hylonome" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Story of Cyllarus and Hylonome</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The centaur Cyllarus is mortally wounded in the conflict with the Lapithae; and his mistress Hylonome expires in his arms.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Nor could thy form, oh Cyllarus, foreslow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy fate: (if form to monsters men allow:)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just bloom’d thy beard; thy beard of golden hue:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy locks in golden waves about thy shoulders flew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sprightly thy look! Thy shapes in every part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So clean, as might instruct the sculptor’s art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As far as man extended: where began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The beast, the beast was equal to the man:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Add but a horse’s head and neek, and he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh Castor, was a courser worthy thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was his back proportion’d for the seat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So rose his brawny chest; so swiftly moved his feet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coal black his colour, but like jet it shone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His legs and flowing tail were white alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beloved by many maidens of his kind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fair Hylonome possess’d his mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hylonome, for features, and for face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excelling all the nymphs of double race:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor less her blandishments than beauty move;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At once both living, and confessing love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him she dress ‘d; for him, with female care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She comb’d, and set in curl her auburn hair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of roses, violets, and lilies mix’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sprigs of flowing rosemary betwixt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She form’d the chaplet that adorn’d her front:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In waters of the Pegasaean fount,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the streams that from the fountain play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She wash’d her face, and bathed her twice a day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The scarf of furs, that hung below her side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was ermine, or the panther’s spotted pride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spoils of no common beast. With equal flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They loved: their sylvan pleasures were the same.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Uncertain from what hand, a flying dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Cyllarus was sent, which pierced his heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The javelin drawn from out the mortal wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He faints with stagg’ring steps, and seeks the ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fair within her arms received his fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strove his wandering spirits to recall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And while her hand the streaming blood opposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Join’d face to face, his lips with hers she closed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stifled with kisses, a sweet death he dies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fills the fields with undistinguish’d cries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last her words were in her clamour drown’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For my stunn’d ears received no vocal sound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In madness of her grief, she seized the dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New drawn, and reeking from her lover’s heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her bare bosom the sharp point applied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wounded fell; and falling by his side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Embraced him in her arms; and thus embracing died.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ev’n still methinks I see Phaeocomes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange was his habit, and as odd his dress:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Six lions’ hides, with thongs together fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His upper part defended to his waist:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where man ended, the continued vest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spread on his back, the houss and trappings of a beast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stump too heavy for a team to draw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(It seems a fable, though the fact I saw,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He threw at Pholon; the descending blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Divides the scull, and cleaves his head in two.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brains, from nose, and mouth, and either ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came issuing out, as through a colander</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The curdled milk, or from the press the whey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Driven down by weights above, is drain’d away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But him, while stooping down to spoil the slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pierced through the paunch, 1 tumbled on the plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Chihonius and Teleboas I slew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fork the former ann’d; a dart his fellow threw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The javelin wounded me; (behold the scar:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then was my time to seek the Trojan war;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then I was Hector’s match in open field;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he was then unborn, at least a child:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I am nothing.) I forbear to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Periphantas how Pyretus fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The centaur by the knight: nor will I stay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Amphyx, or what deaths he dealt that day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What honour, with a pointless lance, he won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stuck in the front of a four-footed man:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What fame young Macareus obtain’d in fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or dwell on Nessus, now return’d from flight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How Prophet Mopsus not alone divined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose valour equall’d his foreseeing mind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="caeneus-transformed-to-an-eagle" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Caeneus Transformed to an Eagle</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The nymph Caenis, whose name is changed to Cameus, pursues the centaurs with great slaughter, who at length crush the hero with huge forests of trees⁠—The gods, however, in compassion, change him into an eagle.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Already Caeneus, with his conquering hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had slaughter’d five, the boldest of their band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pyrachmus, Helymus, Antimachus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bromus the brave, and stronger Stiphelus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their names I number’d, and remember well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No trace remaining, by what wounds they fell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Latreus, the bulkiest of the double race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom the spoil’d arms of slain Halesus grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In years retaining still his youthful might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though his black hairs were interspersed with white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the embattled ranks began to prance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proud of his helm, and Macedonian lance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rode the ring around, that either host</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might hear him, while he made this empty boast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘And from a female shall we suffer shame?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Caenis still, not Caeneus, is thy name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still the native softness of thy kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prevails, and leaves the woman in thy mind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remember what thou wert; what price was paid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To change thy sex; to make thee not a maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And but a man in show: go, card and spin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leave the business of the war to men.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“While thus the boaster exercised his pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fatal spear of Caeneus reach’d his side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just in the mixture of the kinds it ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the nether beast and upper man:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The monster, mad with rage, and stung with smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His lance directed at the hero’s heart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It struck; but bounded from his hardened breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like hail from tiles, which the safe house invest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor seem’d the stroke with more effect to come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than a small pebble falling on a drum.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He next his falchion tried, in closer fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the keen falchion had no power to bite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thrust; the blunted point return’d again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Since downright blows,’ he cried, ‘and thrusts are vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll prove his side:’ in strong embraces held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He proved his side; his side the sword repell’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hollow belly echoed to the stroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Untouch’d his body as a solid rock:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aim’d at his rieck, at last the blade in shivers broke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The impassive knight stood idle, to deride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His rage, and offer’d oft his naked side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length, ‘Now, monster, in thy turn,’ he cried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Try thou the strength of Caeneus:’ at the word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thrust, and in his shoulder plunged the sword;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then writhed his hand; and as he drove it down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep in his breast, made many wounds in one.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The centaurs saw, enraged, the unhoped success,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rushing on in crowds, together press;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At him, and him alone, their darts they threw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repulsed they from his fated body flew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amazed they stood, till Monichus began:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Oh shame, a nation conquer’d by a man!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A woman-man! yet more a man is he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than all our race; and what he was, are we.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now what avail our nerves? the united force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of two the strongest creatures, man and horse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor goddess-born, nor of Ixion’s seed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We seem, (a lover built for Juno’s bed,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Master’d by this half-man. Whole mountains throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With woods at once, and bury him below.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This only way remains: nor need we doubt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To choke the soul within, though not to force it out;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heap weights instead of wounds.’ He chanced to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where southern storms had rooted up a tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This, raised from earth, against the foe he threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The example shown, his fellow-brutes pursue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With forest loads the warrior they invade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Othrys and Pelion soon were void of shad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spreading groves were naked mountains made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press’d with the burden, Caeneus pants for breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on his shoulders bears the wooden death:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To heave the intolerable weight he tries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length it rose above his mouth and eyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet still he heaves; and struggling with despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shakes all aside, and gains a gulp of air:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A short relief, which but prolongs his pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He faints by fits; and then respires again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last the burden only nods above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when an earthquake stirs the Idiean grove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doubtful his death: he suffocated seem’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To most; but otherwise our Nopsus deem’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who said he saw a yellow bird arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From out the piles, and cleave the liquid skies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw it too, with golden feathers bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor ere before beheld so strange a sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom Mopsus viewing, as it soar’d around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our troop, and heard the pinion’s rattling sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘All hail,’ he cried, ‘thy country’s grace and love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once first of men below, now first of birds above.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its author to the story gave belief:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For us, our courage was increased by grief:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ashamed to see a single man, pursued</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With odds, to sink beneath a multitude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We push’d the foe; and forced to shameful flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Part fell, and part escaped by favour of the night.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="fate-of-periclymenos" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Fate of Periclymenos</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Periclymenos, the brother of Nestor, is endowed by Neptune with the power of assuming whatever shape he pleases⁠—In the form of an eagle he assaults Hercules, who mortally wounds him with an arrow.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This tale, by Nestor told, did much displease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tlepolemus, the seed of Hercules;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For often he had heard his father say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he himself was present at the fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And more than shared the glories of the day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Old Chronicle,” he said, “among the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You might have named Alcides at the least:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is he not worth your praise?” The Pylian prince</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sigh’d ere he spoke, then made this proud defence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My former woes, in long oblivion drown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would haveiost; but you renew the wound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better to pass him o’er, than to relate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cause I have your mighty sire to hate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fame has fill’d the world, and reach’d the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Which, oh I wish, with truth, I could deny!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We praise not Hector, though his name, we know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is great in arms: ’tis hard to praise a foe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“He, your great father, levell’d to the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Messenia’s towers; nor better fortune found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Elis and Pylos: that a neighbouring state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this my own; both guiltless of their fate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To pass the rest; twelve, wanting one, he slew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My brethren, who their birth from Neleus drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All youths of early promise, had they lived;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By him they perish’d: I alone survived:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest were easy conquest: but the fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Periclymenos is wondrous to relate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him our common grandsire of the main</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had given to change his form, and changed, resume again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Varied at pleasure, every shape he tried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in all beasts Alcides still defied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vanquish’d on earth, at length he soar’d above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Changed to the bird that bears the bolt of Jove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The new-dissembled eagle, now endued</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With beak and pounces, Hercules pursued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cufFd his manly cheeks, and tore his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then safe retired, and tower’d in empty space.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alcides bore not long his flying foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But bending his inevitable bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reach’d him in air, suspended as he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his pinion fix’d the feather’d wood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light was the wound; but in the sinew hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The point, and his disabled wing unstrung.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wheel’d in air, and stretch’d his vans in vain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His vans no longer could his flight sustain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For while one gather’d wind, one unsupplied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung drooping down, nor poised his other side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He fell: the shaft that slightly was impress’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now from his heavy fall, with weight increased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drove through his neck aslant; he spurns the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the soul issues through the windpipe’s wound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now, brave commander of the Rhodian seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What praise is due from me to Hercules?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silence is all the vengeance I decree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For my slain brothers; but ’tis peace with thee.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus, with a flowing tongue, old Nestor spoke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to full bowls each other they provoke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length, with weariness and wine oppress’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They rise from table, and withdraw to rest.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="death-of-achilles" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Death of Achilles</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Achilles, having fallen a sacrifice to the hostility of Apollo and the shafts of Paris, Ajax and Ulysses advance their claims to the armour of the deceased hero.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The sire of Cycnus, monarch of the main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime laments his son in battle slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And vows the victor’s death; nor vows in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For nine long years the smother’d pain he bore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Achilles was not ripe for fate before:)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then when he saw the promised hour was near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thus bespoke the god that guides the year:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Immortal offspring of my brother Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My brightest nephew, and whom best I love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose hauds were join’d with mine, to raise the wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of tottering Troy, now nodding to her fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dost thou not mourn our power employ’d in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the defenders of our city slain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pass the rest, could noble Hector lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unpitied, dragg’d around his native Troy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet the murderer lives: himself by far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A greater plague than all the wasteful war:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lives, the proud Pelides lives, to boast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our town destroy’d, our common labour lost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, could I meet him! but I wish too late:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prove my trident is not in his fate!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let him try (for that’s allow’d) thy dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pierce his only penetrable part.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Apollo bows to the superior throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his uncle’s anger adds his own;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, in a cloud involved, he takes his flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Greeks and Trojans mix’d in mortal fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And found out Paris, lurking where he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stain’d his arrows with plebeian blood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phoebus to him alone the god confess’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to the recreant knight he thus address’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Dost thou not blush, to spend thy shafts in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On a degenerate and ignoble train?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If fame or better vengeance be thy care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There aim; and with one arrow end the war.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He said; and show’d from far the blazing shield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sword, which, but Achilles, none could wield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how he moved a god, and mow’d the standing field.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deity himself directs aright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The envenom’d shaft, and wings the fatal flight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus fell the foremost of the Grecian name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he, the base adulterer, boasts the fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A spectacle to glad the Trojan train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And please old Priam, after Hector slain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If by a female hand he had foreseen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was to die, his wish had rather been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lance and double axe of the fair warrior queen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now the terror of the Trojan field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Grecian honour, ornament, and shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High on a pile the unconquer’d chief is placed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The god that arm’d him first, consumed at last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the mighty man, the small remains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little urn, and scarcely fill’d, contains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet great in Homer, still Achilles lives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And equal to himself, himself survives.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His buckler owns its former lord, and brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New cause of strife between contending kings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who worthiest after him his sword to wield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or wear his armour, or sustain his shield.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ev’n Diomede sat mute, with downcast eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conscious of wonted worth to win the prize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor Menelaus presumed these arms to claim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor he, the king of men, a greater name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two rivals only rose: Laertes’ son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the vast bulk of Ajax Telamon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The king, who cherish’d each with equal love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from himself all envy would remove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left both to be determinedjby the laws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the Grecian chiefs transferr’d the cause.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
