<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:poem">
		<section id="book-10" epub:type="division">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="story-of-orpheus-and-eurydice" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Story of Orpheus and Eurydice</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Orpheus, by his skill in music, obtains from Pluto the restoration of his wife Eurydice on condition of not looking behind him till his arrival in the upper regions: his promises are for gotten; and he turns to gaze on his long-lost wife, who in stantly vanishes from his eyes⁠—Her husband, in despair, totally separates himself from the society of mankind.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thence, in his saffron robe, for distant Thrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hymen departs, through air’s unmeasured space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Orpheus call’d, the nuptial power attends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with ill-omen’d augury descends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor cheerful look’d the god, nor prosperous spoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor blazed his torch, but wept in hissing smoke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain they whirl it round, in vain they shake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No rapid motion can its flames awake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With dread these inauspicious signs were view’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon a more disastrous end ensued;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as the bride, amid the Naiad train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran joyful, sporting o’er the flow’ry plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A venom’d viper bit her as she pass’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instant she fell, and sudden breathed her last.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When long his loss the Thracian had deplored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Not by superior powers to be restored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inflamed by love, and urged by deep despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He leaves the realms of light and upper air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Daring to tread the dark Tenarian road,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tempt the shades in their obscure abode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through gliding spectres of the interr’d to go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And phantom people of the world below:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Persephone he seeks, and him who reigns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er ghosts, and hell’s uncomfortable plains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arrived, he, tuning to his voice his strings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus to the king and queen of shadows sings:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ye powers, who under earth your realms extend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom all mortals must one day descend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If here ’tis granted sacred truth to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I come not curious to explore your hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor come to boast (by vain ambition fired)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How Cerberus at my approach retired;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My wife alone I seek, for her loved sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These terrors I support, this journey take:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She, luckless wandering, or by fate misled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chanced on a lurking viper’s crest to tread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vengeful beast, inflamed with fury, starts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through her heel his deathful venom darts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus was she snatch’d untimely to her tomb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her growing years cut short, and springing bloom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long I my loss endeavour’d to sustain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strongly strove; but strove, alas! in vain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length I yielded, won by mighty love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well known is that omnipotence above:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But here, I doubt, his unfelt influence fails;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet a hope within my heart prevails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That here, ev’n here, he has been known of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At least if truth be by tradition told.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If fame of former loves belief may find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You both by love, and love alone, were join’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, by the horrors which these realms surround.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the vast chaos of these depths profound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the sad silence, which eternal reigns</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er all the waste of these wide-stretching plains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me again Eurydice receive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let fate her quick-spun thread of life reweave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All our possessions are but loans from you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon or late you must be paid your due;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hither we haste to humankind’s last seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your endless empire, and our sure retreat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She too, when ripen’d years she shall attain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must, of avoidless right, be yours again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I but the transient use of that require,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which soon, too soon, I must resign entire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if the destinies refuse my vow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no remission of her doom allow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Know, I’m determined to return no more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So both retain, or both to life restore.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus, while the bard melodiously complains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his lyre accords his vocal strains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very bloodless shades attention keep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And silent seem compassionate to weep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ev’n Tantalus his flood unthirsty views,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor flies the stream, nor he the stream pursues,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ixion’s wondering wheel its whirl suspends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the voracious vulture, charm’d, attends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more the Belides their toil bemoan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Sisyphus, reclined, sits listening on his stone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then first, (’tis said,) by sacred verse subdued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The furies felt their cheeks with tears bedew’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor could the rigid king or queen of hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The impulse of pity in their hearts repel.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, from a troop of shades that last arrived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eurydice was call’d, and stood revived:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slow she advanced, and halting, seem’d to feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fatal wound yet painful in her heel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus he obtains the suit so much desired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On strict observance of the terms required;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if, before he reach the realms of air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He backward cast his eyes to view the fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The forfeit grant, that instant, void is made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>sAnd she for ever left a lifeless shade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now through the noiseless throng their way they bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both with pain the rugged road ascend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark was the path, and difficult, and steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thick with vapours from the smoky deep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They wellnigh now had pass’d the bounds of night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And just approach ‘d the margin of the light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he, mistrusting lest her steps might stray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gladsome of the glimpse of dawning day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His longing eyes impatient backward cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To catch a lover’s look, but look’d his last;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, instant dying, she again descends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While he to empty air his arm extends:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again she died, nor yet her lord reproved:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What could she say but that too well he loved?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One last farewell she spoke, which scarce he heard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So soon she dropp’d, so sudden disappear’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All stunn’d he stood when thus his wife he view’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By second fate and double death subdued;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not more amazement by that wretch was shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom Cerberus beholding turn’d to stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor Olenus could more astonish’d look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When on himself Lethea’s fault he took;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His beauteous wife, who, too secure, had dared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her face to vie with goddesses, compared;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once join’d by love, they stand united still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn’d to contiguous rocks on Ida’s hill.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now to repass the Styx in vain he tries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charon, averse, his pressing suit denies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seven days entire, along the infernal shores</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disconsolate, the bard Eurydice deplores;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Defiled with filth his robe, with tears his cheeks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sustenance, but grief and cares he seeks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of rigid fate incessant he complains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hell’s inexorable gods arraigns.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This ended, to high Rhodope he hastes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Haemus mountain, bleak with northern blasts</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now his yearly race the circling sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had thrice complete through watery Pisces run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since Orpheus fled the face of womankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all soft union with the sex declined.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether his ill success this change had bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or binding vows made to his former bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whate’er the cause, in vain the nymphs contest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With rival eyes, to warm his frozen breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For every nymph with love his lays inspired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But every nymph, repulsed, with grief retired.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A hill there was, and on that hill a mead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With verdure thick, but destitute of shade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, now, the muse’s son no sooner sings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sooner strikes his sweet-resounding strings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But distant groves the flying sounds receive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And listening trees their rooted stations leave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Themselves transplanting, all around they grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And various shades their various kinds bestow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, tall Chaonian oaks their branches spread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While weeping poplars, there, erect their head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foodful esculus here shoots his leaves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That turf, soft lime-tree, this, fat beech, receives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, brittle hazels; laurels, here, advance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there, tough ash, to form the hero’s lance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, silver firs, with knotless trunks, ascend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, scarlet oaks beneath their acorns bend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That spot admits the hospitable plane;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this, the maple grows with clouded grain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, watery willows are with lotus seen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, tamarisk, and box, for ever green:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With double hue, here, myrtles grace the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And laurustines with purple berries crown’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With pliant feet, now, ivies this way wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vines yonder rise, and elms with vines entwined;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wild ornus now, the pitch-tree next, takes root,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And arbutus adorn’d with blushing fruit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then easy-bending palms, the victor’s prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pines erect with bristly tops arise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Rhea grateful still, the pine remains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Atys still some favour she retains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He once in human shape her breast had warm’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now is cherish’d, to a tree transform’d.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="fable-of-cyparissus" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Fable of Cyparissus</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Cyparissus by accident kills a favourite stag, which affects him with so much grief, that he pines away, and is changed into a cypress-tree by Apollo.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Amid the throng of this promiscuous wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With pointed top, the taper cypress stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tree, which once a youth, and heavenly fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was of that deity the darling care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose hand adapts, with equal skill, the strings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bows with which he kills, and harps to which he sings.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For heretofore, a mighty stag was bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which on the fertile fields of Caea fed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In shape and size he all his kind excell’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to Carthaean nymphs was sacred held;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His beamy head, with branches high display’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Afforded to itself an ample shade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His horns were gilt, and his smooth neck was graced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With silver collars thick with gems enchased;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A silver boss upon his forehead hung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brazen pendants in his ear-rings rung;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frequenting houses he familiar grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And learn’d, by custom, nature to subdue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till by degrees, of fear and wildness broke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ev’n stranger hands his proffer’d neck might stroke.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Much was the beast by Casa’s youth caress’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou, sweet Cypurissus, lovedst him best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thee, to pastures fresh, he oft was led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thee oft water’d at the fountain’s head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His horns with garlands, now, by thee were tied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, now, thou on his back wouldst wanton ride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now here, now there, wouldst bound along the plains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ruling his tender mouth with purple reins.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas when the summer sun, at noon of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through glowing Cancer shot his burning ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas then, the fav’rite stag, in cool retreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had sought a shelter from the scorching heat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the grass his weary limbs he laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inhaling freshness, from the breezy shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Cyparissus, with his pointed dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unknowing, pierced him to the panting heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when the youth, surprised, his error found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw him dying of the cruel wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself he would have slain through desperate grief;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What said not Phoebus, that might yield relief:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cease his mourning he the boy desired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or mourn no more than such a loss required;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ho incessant grieved. At length address’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the superior powers a last request;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Praying, in expiation of his crime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thenceforth to mourn to all succeeding time.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now of blood exhausted he appears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drain’d by a torrent of continual tears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fleshy colour in his body fades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a green tincture all his limbs invades:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his fair head, where curling locks late hung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A horrid bush with bristled branches sprung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, stiffening by degrees, its stem extends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till to the starry skies the spire ascends.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Apollo sad look’d on, and sighing, cried:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Then, be for ever what thy prayer implied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bemoan’d by me, in others grief excite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still preside at every funeral rite.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus the sweet artist in a wondrous shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of verdant trees, which harmony had made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Encircled sat, with his own triumphs crown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of listening birds and savages around.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again the trembling strings he dext’rous tries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again from discord makes soft music rise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then tunes his voice: “Oh muse, from whom I sprung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jove be my theme, and thou inspire my song:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Jove ray grateful voice I oft have raised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft his almighty power with pleasure praised.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sung the giants in a solemn strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blasted and thunderstruck on Phlegra’s plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now be my lyre in softer accents moved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sing of blooming boys by gods beloved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to relate what virgins, void of shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have suffer’d vengeance for a lawless flame.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="hyacinthus-transformed-into-a-flower" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Hyacinthus Transformed Into a Flower</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">A beautiful youth, named Hyacintbus, is accidentally killed while playing at quoits with Apollo, who changes his blood into a flower hearing the name of his deceased friend.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Phoebus for thee too, Hyacinth, design’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A place among the gods, had fate been kind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet this he gave: as oft as wintry rains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are pass’d, and vernal breezes soothe the plains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the green turf a purple flower you rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with your fragrant breath perfume the skies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>You, when alive, were Phoebus’ darling boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In you he placed his hopes and fix’d his joy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their god the Delphic priests consult in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eurotas now he loves, and Sparta’s plain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hands the use of bow and harp forget,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hold the dogs, or bear the corded net;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er hanging cliffs swift he pursues the game;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each hour his pleasure, each augments his flame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The midday sun now shone with equal light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the past and the succeeding light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They strip, then, smooth’d with suppling oil, essay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pitch the rounded quoit, their wonted play.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A well-poised disk first hasty Phoebus threw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It cleft the air, and whistled as it flew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It reach’d the mark, a most surprising length,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which spoke an equal share of art and strength.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce was it fallen, when, with too eager hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Young Hyacinth ran to snatch it from the sand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the curs’d orb, which met a stony soil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flew in his face with violent recoil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both faint, both pale and breathless, now appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The boy with pain, the anxious god with fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ran, and raised him bleeding from the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chafes his cold limbs, and wipes the fatal wound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then herbs of noblest juice in vain applies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wound is mortal, and his skill defies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As in a water’d garden’s blooming walk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When some rude hand has bruised its tender stalk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fading lily droops its languid head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bends to earth, its life and beauty fled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Hyacinth, with head reclined, decays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, sickening, now no more his charms displays.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Oh, thou art gone, my boy,” Apollo cried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Defrauded of thy youth in all its pride!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, once my joy, art all my sorrow now;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to my guilty hand my grief I owe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet from myself I might the fault remove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless to sport and play a fault should prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh could I for thee, or but with thee, die!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But cruel fates to me that power deny:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet on my tongue thou shalt for ever dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy name my lyre shall sound, my verse shall tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to a flower transform’d, unheard of yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stamp’d on thy leaves, my cries thou shalt repeat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The time shall come, prophetic I foreknow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, join’d to thee, a mighty chief shall grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with my plaints his name thy leaf shall show.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>While Phoebus thus the laws of fate reveal’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold, the blood which stain’d the verdant field</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is blood no longer; but a flower full blown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far brighter than the Tyrian scarlet, shone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lily’s form it took; its purple hue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was all that made a difference to the view:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor stopp’d he here: the god upon its leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sad expression of his sorrow weaves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to this hour the mournful purple wears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ai, Ai, inscribed in funeral characters.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor are the Spartans, who so much are famed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For virtue, of their Hyacinth ashamed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still, with pompous wo and solemn state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Hyacinthian feasts they yearly celebrate.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="transformations-of-the-cerastae-and-propoetides" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Transformations of the Cerastae and Propoetides</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Cerastae are punished for their cruelty to strangers, by being changed into oxen by Venus⁠—The angry goddess punishes the wantonness of the Propoetides by their transformation into stones.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Inquire of Amathus, whose wealthy ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With veins of every metal does abound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If she to her Propoetides would show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The honour Sparta does to him allow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“No more,” she’d say, “such wretches would we grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than those whose crooked horns deform’d their face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thence Cerastae call’d, an impious race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before whose gates a reverend altar stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Jove inscribed, the hospitable god:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This had some stranger seen, with gore besmear’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blood of lambs and bulls it had appear’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their slaughter’d guests’ it was; not flock nor herd.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Venus these barb’rous sacrifices view’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With just abhorrence, and with wrath pursued.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At first, to punish such nefarious crimes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their towns she meant to leave, her once-loved climes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“But why,” said she, “for their offence should I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My dear delightful plains and cities fly?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No, let the impious people, who have sinn’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A punishment in death or exile find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If death or exile too severe be thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let them in some vile shape bemoan their fault;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While next her mind a proper form employs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admonish’d by their horns, she fix’d her choice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their former crest remains upon their heads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their strong limbs an ox’s shape invades.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The blasphemous Propoetides denied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worship of Venus, and her power defied;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unknowing how to blush, and shameless grown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A small transition changes them to stone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="story-of-pygmalion-and-the-statue" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Story of Pygmalion and the Statue</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Pygmalion, a celebrated artist, becomes enamoured of a beautiful statue of ivory which he has made; and at his request Venus endues it with animation, and crowns their union by the birth of a son.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Pygmalion, loathing their lascivious life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abhorr’d all womankind, but most a wife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So single chose to live, and shunn’d to wed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well pleased to want a consort of his bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet fearing idleness, the nurse of ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sculpture exercised his happy skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And carved in ivory such a maid, so fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As nature could not with his art compare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were she to work; but, in her own defence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must take her pattern here, and copy hence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleased with his idol, he commends, admires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adores, and last, the thing adored desires:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A very virgin in her face was seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had she moved, a living maid had been:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One would have thought she could have stirr’d, but strove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With modesty, and was ashamed to move:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art hid with art, so well perform’d the cheat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It caught the carver with his own deceit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knows ’tis madness, yet he must adore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still the more he knows it, loves the more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flesh, or what so seems, he touches oft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which feels so smooth that he believes it soft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fired with this thought, at once he strain’d the breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the lips a loving kiss impress’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis true, the harden’d breast resists the gripe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the cold lips return a kiss unripe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when, retiring back, he look’d again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To think it ivory was a thought too mean;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With flattery now he seeks her mind to move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now with gifts, the powerful bribes of love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He furnishes her closet first, and fills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crowded shelves with rarities of shells;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adds orient pearls, which from the conchs he drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the sparkling stones of various hue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And parrots, imitating human tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And singing birds, in silver cages hung;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every fragrant flower and odorous green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were sorted well, with lumps of amber laid between:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rich fashionable robes her person deck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pendants her ears, and pearls adorn her neck:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her taper’d fingers too with rings are graced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And an embroider’d zone surrounds her slender waist.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus like a queen array’d, so richly dress’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beauteous she show’d, but unadorn’d the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then from the floor he raised a royal bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With coverings of Sidonian purple spread.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The feast of Venus came, a solemn day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which the Cypriots due devotion pay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With gilded horns the milk-white heifers led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slaughter’d before the sacred altars bled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Pygmalion offering, first approach’d the shrine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then with prayers implored the powers divine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almighty gods, if all we mortals want,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If all we can require, be yours to grant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make this fair statue mine, he would have said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But changed his words for shame, and only pray’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Give me the likeness of my ivory maid.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The golden goddess, present at the prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well knew he meant th’ inanimated fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave the sign of granting his desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thrice in cheerful flames ascends the fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The youth, returning to his mistress hies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, impudent in hope, with ardent eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And beating breast, by the dear statue lies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He kisses her white lips, renews the bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And looks, and thinks they redden at the kiss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thought them warm before, nor longer stays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But next his hand on the hard substance lays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hard as it was, beginning to relent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seem’d the block beneath his fingers bent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He felt again⁠—his fingers made a print⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas flesh, but flesh so firm, it rose against the dint:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pleasing task he fails not to renew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soft, and more roft, at every touch it grew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like pliant wax, when chafing hands reduce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The former mass to form, and frame for use.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would believe, but yet is still in pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tries his argument of sense again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presses the pulse, and feels the leaping vein:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Convinced, o’erjoy’d, his studied thanks and praise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her who made the miracle, he pays:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then lips to lips he join’d; now freed from fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He found the savour of the kiss sincere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this the waken’d image oped her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And view’d at once the light and lover with surprise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goddess, present at the match she made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So bless’d the bed, such fruitfulness convey’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ere ten months had sharpen’d either horn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To crown their bliss, a lovely boy was born:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paphos his name, who, grown to manhood, wall’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The city Paphos, from the founder call’d.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="story-of-venus-and-adonis" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Story of Venus and Adonis</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Venus becomes enamoured of young Adonis, whom she cautions against the pursuit of wild beasts, lest he should meet a premature death⁠—The youth disregards this advice, and receives a mortal bite from a wild boar which he has wounded; and Venus, after lamenting his fate, changes him into a flower called anemone.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Fob Cytherea’s lips while Cupid press’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He with a heedless arrow razed her breast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goddess felt it, and, with fury stung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wanton mischief from her bosom flung:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet thought at first the danger slight; but found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dart too faithful, and too deep the wound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fired with a mortal beauty, she disdains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To haunt the Idalian mount or Phrygian plains:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She seeks not Cnidos, nor her Paphian shrines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor Amathus, that teems with braien mines:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ev’n heaven itself, with all its sweets unsought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adonis far a sweeter heaven is thought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On him she hangs, and fonds with ev’ry art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never, never knows from him to part.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She whose soft limbs had only been display’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On rosy beds, beneath the myrtle shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose pleasing care was to improve each grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And add more charms to an unrivall’d face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now buskin’d, like the virgin huntress, goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through woods, and pathless wilds, and mountain snows:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With her own tuneful voice she joys to cheer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The panting hounds, that chase the flying deer:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She runs the labyrinth of fearful hares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fearless beasts and dangerous prey forbears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hunts not the grinning wolf or foamy boar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trembles at the lion’s hungry roar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee too, Adonis, with a lover’s care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She warns, if warn’d, thou wouldst avoid the snare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“To furious animals advance not nigh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ply those that follow, follow those that fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis chance alone must the survivors save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whene’er brave spirits will attempt the brave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, lovely youth! in harmless sports delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Provoke not beasts, which, arm’d by nature, fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me, if not thyself, vouchsafe to fear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let not thy thirst of glory cost me dear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Boars know not how to spare a blooming age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sparkling eyes can soothe the lion’s rage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor all thy charms a savage breast can move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which have so deeply touch’d the queen of love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When bristled boars from beaten thickets spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In grinded tusks a thunderbolt they bring:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The daring hunters lions roused devour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vast is their fury, and as vast their power:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cursed be their tawny race: if thou wouldst hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What kindled thus my hate, then lend an ear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wondrous tale I will to thee unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How the fell monsters rose from crimes of old:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by long toils I faint. See! wide display’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A grateful poplar courts us with a shade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The grassy turf, beneath, so verdant shows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We may secure delightfully repose:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Perhaps thou mayst have heard a virgin’s name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who still in swiftness swiftest youths o’ercame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wondrous, that female weakness should outdo</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A manly strength; the wonder yet is true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas doubtful if her triumphs in the field</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did to her form’s triumphant glories yield;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether her face could with more ease decoy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A crowd of lovers, or her feet destroy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For once Apollo she implored to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If courteous fates a consort would allow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘A consort brings thy ruin,’ he replied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Oh learn to want the pleasures of a bride!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor shalt thou want them to thy wretched cost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Atalanta living shall be lost.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such a rueful fate the affrighted maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sought green recesses in the woodland glade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor signing suitors her resolves could move;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She bade them show their speed, to show their love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He only who could conquer in the race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might hope the conquer’d virgin to embrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While he whose tardy feet had lagg’d behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was doom’d the sad reward of death to find.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though great the prize, yet rigid the decree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But blind with beauty, who can rigour see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ev’n on these laws the fair they rashly sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And danger in excess of love forgot.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“There sat Hippomenes, prepared to blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In lovers such extravagance of flame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘And must,’ he said, ‘the blessings of a wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be dearly purchased by a risk of life?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when he saw the wonders of her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her limbs naked, springing to the race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her limbs, as exquisitely turned as mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, if a woman thou, might vie with thine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With lifted hands, he cried, ‘Forgive the tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which durst, ye youths, your well-timed courage wrong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I knew not that the nymph for whom you strove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deserved the unbounded transports of your love.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw, admired, and thus her spotless frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He praised, and praising, kindled his own flame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A rival now to all the youths who run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Envious, he fears they should not be undone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘But why,’ reflects he, ‘idly thus is shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fate of others, yet untried my own?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The coward must not on love’s aid depend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The god was ever to the bold a friend.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime the virgin flies, or seems to fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift as a Scythian arrow cleaves the sky:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still more and more the youth her charms admires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The race itself to exalt her charms conspires.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The golden pinions, which her feet adorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In wanton flutterings by the winds are borne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down from her head the long fair tresses flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sport with lovely negligence below:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The waving ribands, which her buskins tie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her snowy skin with waving purple die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As crimson veils in palaces display’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the white marble lend a blushing shade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor long he gazed, yet while he gazed, she gain’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goal, and the victorious wreath obtain’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vanquish’d sigh, and, as the law decreed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pay the dire forfeit, and prepare to bleed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then rose Hippomenes, not yet afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fix’d his eyes full on the beauteous maid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Where is,’ he cried, ‘the mighty conquest won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To distance those who want the nerves to run?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here prove superior strength; nor shall it be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy loss of glory, if excell’d by me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High my descent; near Neptune I aspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Neptune was grand parent to my sire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From that great god the fourth myself I trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor sink my virtues yet beneath my race.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou from Hippomenes, o’ercome, mayst claim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An envied triumph, and a deathless fame.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“While thus the youth the virgin power defies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Silent she views him still with softer eyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thoughts in her breast a doubtful strife begin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ’tis not happier now to lose than win.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘What god, a foe to beauty, would destroy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The promised ripeness of this blooming boy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his life’s danger does he seek my bed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce am I half so greatly worth,’ she said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Nor has his beauty moved my breast to love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet, I own, such beauty well might move;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis not his charms, ’tis pity would engage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul to spare the greenness of his age.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What, that heroic courage fires his breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shines through brave disdain of fate confess’d?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What, that his patronage by close degrees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Springs from the imperial ruler of the seas’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then add the love, which bids him undertake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The race, and dare to perish for my sake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bloody nuptials, heedless youth, beware!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fly, timely fly, from a too barb’rous fair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At pleasure choose: thy love will be repaid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a less foolish and more beauteous maid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But why this tenderness, before unknown?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why beats and pants my breast for him alone?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes have seen his numerous rivals yield;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him too share the rigour of the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since, by their fates untaught, his own he courts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus with ruin insolently sports.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet for what crime shall he his death receive?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it a crime with me to wish to live?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall his kind passion his destruction prove?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is this the fatal recompense of love?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fair a youth destroy’d, would conquest shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nymphs eternally detest my fame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still why should nymphs my guiltless fame upbraid?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did I the fond adventurer persuade?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! I wish thou wouldst the course decline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or that my swiftness was excel’d by thine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See what a virgin’s bloom adorns the boy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why wilt thou run, and why thyself destroy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hippomenes! oh that I ne’er had been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By those bright eyes unfortunately seen!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! tempt not thus a swift untimely fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy life is worthy of the longest date.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus she disclosed the woman’s secret heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young, innocent, and new to Cupid’s dart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her thoughts, her words, her actions, wildy rove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With love she burns, yet knows not that ’tis love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Her royal sire now with the murm’ring crowd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Demands the race impatiently aloud.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hippomenes then with true fervour pray’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘My bold attempt let Venus kindly aid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By her sweet power I felt this amorous fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still may she succour whom she did inspire.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A soft, unenvious wind, with speedy care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wafted to heaven the lover’s tender prayer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pity, I own, soon gain’d the wish’d consent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the assistance he implored I lent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Cyprian lands, though rich, in richness yield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that surnamed the Tamasenian field:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That field of old was added to my shrine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And its choice products consecrated mine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tree there stands, full glorious to behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gold are the leaves, the crackling branches gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It chanced, three apples in my hands I bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which newly from the tree I sportive tore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seen by the youth alone, to him I brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fruit, and when and how to use it taught.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The signal sounding by the king’s command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both start at once, and sweep the imprinted sand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So swiftly moved their feet, they might with ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce moisten’d, skim along the glassy seas;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, with a wondrous levity be borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er yellow harvests of unbending corn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now favouring peals resound from every part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spirit the youth, and fire his fainting heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Hippomenes!’ they cried, ‘thy life preserve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intensely labour, and stretch every nerve:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Base fear alone can baffle thy design;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shoot boldly onward, and the gaol is thine.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis doubtful whether shouts like these convey’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More pleasures to the youth or to the maid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When a long distance oft she could have gain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She check’d her swiftness, and her feet restrain’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sigh’d, and dwelt, and languish’d, on his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with unwilling speed pursued the race.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erspent with heat, his breath he faintly drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Parch’d was his mouth, nor yet the gaol in view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the first apple on the plain he threw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nymph stopp’d sudden at the unusual sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Struck with the fruit so beautifully bright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aside she starts, the wonder to behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eager stoois to catch the rolling gold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The observant youth pass’d by, and scour’d along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While peals of joy rung from the applauding throng.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unkindly she corrects the short delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to redeem the time fleets swift away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift as the lightning, or the northern wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And far she leaves the panting youth behind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again he strives the flying nymph to hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the temptation of the second gold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bright temptation fruitlessly was toss’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So soon, alas! she won the distance lost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now but a little interval of space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remain’d for the decision of the race.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Fair author of the precious gift,’ he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Be thou, oh goddess, author of my aid!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then of the shining fruit the last he drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his full-collected vigour threw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The virgin still the longer to detain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Threw not directly, but across the plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She seem’d a while perplex’d in dubious thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If the far distant apple should be sought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I lured her backward mind to seize the bait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the massy gold gave double weight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My favour to my votary was show’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her speed I lessen’d, and increased her load.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But lest, though long, the rapid race he run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before my longer, tedious tale is done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The youth the gaol, and so the virgin, won.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Might I, Adonis, now not hope to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His grateful thanks pour’d out for victory?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His pious incense on my altars laid?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he nor grateful thanks, nor incense paid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enraged, I vow’d, that with the youth the fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his contempt, should my keen vengeance share:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That future lovers might my power revere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, from their sad examples, learn to fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silent fanes, the sanctified abodes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Cybele, great mother of the gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Raised by Echion in a lonely wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And full of brown religious horroi *ood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a long painful Journey faint, they chose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their weary limbs here secret to repose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soon my power inflamed the lustful boy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Careless of rest, he sought untimely joy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hallow’d gloomy cave, with moss o’ergrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The temple join’d, of native pumice stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where antique images by priests were kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wooden deities securely slept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thither the rash Hippomenes retires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gives a loose to all his wild desires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the chaste cell pollutes with wanton fires.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sacred statues trembled with surprise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The towery goddess, blushing, veil’d her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the vile pair to Stygian sounds had sent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But unrevengeful seem’d that punishment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A heavier doom sugh black profaneness draws⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their taper fingers turn to crooked paws:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more their necks the smoothness can retain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now cover’d sudden with a yellow mane:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arms change to legs: each finds the hard’ning breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of rage unknown, and wond’rous strength possess’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their alter’d looks with fury grim appear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the ground their brushing tails they bear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They haunt the woods: their voices, which before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were musically sweet, now hoarsely roar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence lions, dreadful to the lab’ring swains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are tamed by Cybele, and curb’d with reins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And humbly draw her car along the plains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘But thou, Adonis, my delightful care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of these, and beasts as fierce as these, beware!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The savage, which not shuns thee, timely shun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by rash prowess shouldst thou be undone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A double ruin is contain’d in one.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus cautious Venus school’d her favourite boy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But youthful heat all cautions will destroy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sprightly soul beyond grave counsel flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While with yoked swans the goddess cuts the skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His faithful hounds, led by the tainted wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lodged in thick coverts chanced a boar to find.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The callow hero shovv’d a manly heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pierced the savage with a sidelong dart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flying savage, wounded, turn’d again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrench’d out the gory dart, and foam’d with pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trembling boy by flight his safety sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now recall’d the lore which Venus taught:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now, too late, to fly the boar he strove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who in the groin his tusks impetuous drove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the discolour’d grass Adonis lay⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The monster trampling o’er his beauteous prey.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fair Cytherea, Cyprus scarce in view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heard from afar his groans, and own’d them true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turn’d her snowy swans, and backward flew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as she saw him gasp his latest breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And quivering agonize in pangs of death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down with swift flight she plunged, nor rage forbore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At once her garments and her hair she tore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With cruel blows she beat her guiltless breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fates upbraided, and her love confess’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nor shall they yet,” she cried, “the whole devour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With uncontroll’d inexorable power.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thee, lost youth, my tears and restless pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall in immortal monuments remain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With solemn pomp, in annual rites return’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be thou for ever, my Adonis, mourn’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could Pluto’s queen with jealous fury storm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Menthe to a fragrant herb transform?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet dares not Venus with a change surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a flower bid her fallen hero rise?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then on the blood sweet nectar she bestows⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The scented blood in little bubbles rose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Little as rainy drops, which fluttering fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Borne by the winds, along a lowering sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Short time ensued, till where the blood was shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A flower began to rear its purple head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as on Punic apples is reveal’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in the filmy rind but half conceal’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still here the fate of lovely forms we see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sudden fades the sweet anemone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The feeble stems, to stormy blasts a prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their sickly beauties droop, and pine away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The winds forbid the flowers to flourish long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, owe to winds their names in Grecian song.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
