<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:poem">
		<section id="book-7" epub:type="division">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="story-of-madea-and-jason" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Story of Medea and Jason</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Jason, at the command of the usurper Pelias, who compasses his destruction, arrives at Colchos, accompanied by the princes of Greece, and resolved to effect the recovery of the golden fleece⁠—Medea, the daughter of the king, is captivated with his beauty, and convinced by his professions of unalterable attachment⁠—By her knowledge of magic, she enables him to overcome all opposition, and sets sail with her lover for Greece, where they arrive in safety.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Argonauts now stemm’d the foaming tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to Arcadia’s shore their course applied;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where sightless Phineus spent his age in grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Boreas’ sons engage in his relief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And those unwelcome guests, the odious race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of harpies, from the monarch’s table chase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Jason, then, they greater toils sustain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Phasis’ slimy banks at last they gain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here boldly they demand the golden prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Scythia’s king, who sternly thus replies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mighty labours they must first o’ercome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or sail their Argo thence unfreighted home.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Meanwhile Medea, seized with fierce desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By reason strives to quench the raging fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But strives in vain;⁠—“Some god,” she said, “with stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Reason’s baffled counsel countermands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What unseen power does this disorder move?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis love⁠—at least ’tis like what men call love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Else wherefore should the king’s commands appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me too hard?⁠—But so indeed they are.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I for a stranger fear, lest he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should perish, whom I did but lately see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His death or safety, what are they to me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wretch! from thy virgin breast this flame expel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon⁠—O! could I, all would then be well.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But love, resistless love, my soul invades:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discretion this, affection that, persuades.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see the right, and I approve it too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Condemn the wrong, and yet⁠—the wrong pursue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, royal maid, shouldst thou desire to wed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wanderer, and court a foreign bed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy native land, though barb’rous, can present</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bridegroom worth a royal bride’s consent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whether this adventurer lives or dies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Fate and Fortune’s fickle pleasure lies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet may he live! for to the powers above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A virgin, led by no impulse of love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So just a suit may, for the guiltless, move.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom would not Jason’s valour, youth, and blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invite? or, could these merits be withstood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At least his charming person must incline</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hardest heart⁠—I’m sure ’tis so with mine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, if I help him not, the flaming breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bulls, and earthborn foes, must be his death:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, should he through these dangers force his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last he must be made the dragon’s prey.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If no remorse for such distress I feel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am a tigress, and my breast is steel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why do I scruple then to see him slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the tragic scene my eyes profane?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My magic’s art employ, not to assuage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The savages, but to inflame their rage?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His earthborn foes to fiercer fury move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And accessary to his niurder prove?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gods forbid!⁠—but prayers are idle breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When action only can prevent his death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I betray my father, and the state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To intercept a rambling hero’s fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who may sail off next hour, and, saved from harms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By my assistance, bless another’s arms?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I, not only of my hopes bereft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to unpitied punishment am left.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he is false, let the ingrateful bleed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But no such symptom in his looks I read.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nature would ne’er have lavish’d so much grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his person, if his soul were base.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, he first shall plight his faith, and swear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all the gods; what therefore canst thou fear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Medea haste, from danger set him free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jason shall thy eternal debtor be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou, his queen, with sovereign state install’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Grecian dames, the kind preserver call’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence! idle dreams, by love-sick fancy bred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wilt thou, Medea, by vain wishes led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sister, brother, father, bid adieu?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forsake thy country’s gods, and country too?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My father’s harsh, my brother but a child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sister rivals me, my country’s wild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for its gods, the greatest of them all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inspires my breast, and I obey his call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That great endearments I forsake, is true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But greater far the hopes that I pursue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pride of having saved the youths of Greece</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Each life more precious than our golden fleece);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A nobler soil by me shall be possess’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall see towns with arts and manners bless’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, what I prize above the world beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enjoy my Jason⁠—and when once his bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be more than mortal, and to gods allied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They talk of hazards I must first sustain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of floating islands justling in the main;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our tender bark exposed to dreadful shocks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fierce Charybdis’ gulf, and Scylla’s rocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where breaking waves in whirling eddies roll,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ravenous dogs that in deep caverns howl:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid these terrors, while I lie possess’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of him I love, and lean on Jason’s breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In tempests unconcern’d I will appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or only for my husband’s safety fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Didst thou say husband?⁠—canst thou so deceive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thyself, fond maid, and thy own cheat believe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain thou strivest to varnish o’er thy shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grace thy guilt with wedlock’s sacred name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pull off the cozening mask, and, O! in time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discover and avoid the fatal crime.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She ceased⁠—the Graces now, with kind surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Virtue’s lovely train, before her eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Present themselves, and vanquish’d Cupid flies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She then retires to Hecate’s shrine, that stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far in the covert of a shady wood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She finds the fury of her flames assuaged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, seeing Jason there, again they raged.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blushes and paleness did by turns invade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her tender cheeks, and secret grief betray’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fire, that sleeping under ashes lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh blown, and roused, does up in blazes rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So flamed the virgin’s breast⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New kindled by her lover’s sparkling eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For chance, that day, had, with uncommon grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adorn’d the lovely youth, and through his face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Display’d an air so pleasing, as might charm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A goddess, and a vestal’s bosom warm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her rayish’d eyes survey him o’er and o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As some gay wonder never seen before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transported to the skies she seems to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thinks she gazes on a deity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, when he spoke, and press’d her trembling hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And did, with tender words, her aid demand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With vows, and oaths, to make her soon his bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She wept a flood of tears, and thus replied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I see my error, yet to ruin move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor owe my fate to ignorance, but love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your life I’ll guard, and only crave of you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To swear once more, and⁠—to your oath be true.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He swears, by Hecate he would all fulfil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by her grandfather’s prophetic skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By every thing that doubting love could press,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His present danger, and desired success.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She credits him, and kindly does produce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enchanted herbs, and teaches him their use.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their mystic names and virtues he admires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his booty joyfully retires.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Impatient for the wonders of the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurora drives the loit’ring stars away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now Mars’s mount the pressing people fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crowd below, the nobles crown the hill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The king himself high-throned above the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With iv’ry sceptre, and in purple dress’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forthwith the brass-hoof’d bulls are set at large,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose furious nostrils sulph’rous flame discharge:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blasted herbage by their breath expires;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As forges rumble with excessive fires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And furnaces with fiercer fury glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When water on the panting mass ye throw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such a noise, from their convulsive breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through bellowing throats the struggling vapour press’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet Jason marches up without concern</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While on the advent’rous youth the monsters turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their glaring eyes, and, eager to engage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brandish their steel-tipp’d horns in threat’ning rage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With brazen hoofs they beat the ground, and choke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The anıbient air with clouds of dust and smoke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each gazing Grecian for his champion shakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While bold advances he securely makes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through singing blasts; such wonders magic art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can work, when Love conspires, and plays his part.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The passive savages like statues stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While he their dewlaps strokes with soothing hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To unknown yokes their brawny necks they yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, like tame oxen, plough the wond’ring field.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Colchians stare; the Grecians shout, and raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their champion’s courage with inspiring praise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Imbolden’d now, on fresh attempts he goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With serpent’s teeth the fertile furrows sows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The glebe fermenting, with enchanted juice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes the snake’s teeth a human crop produce:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, as an infant, pris’ner to the womb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Contented sleeps, till to perfection come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then does the cell’s obscure confinement scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He tosses, throbs, and presses to be born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, from the lab’ring earth, no single birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But a whole troop of lusty youths, rush forth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, what’s more strange, with martial fury warm’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for encounter all completely arm’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In rank and file, as they were sow’d, they stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impatient for the signal of command.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No foe but the Aemonian youth appears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At him they level their steel-pointed spears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His frighted friends, who triumph’d just before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With peals of sighs, his desperate case deplore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where such hardy warriors are afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What must the tender and enamour’d maid?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her spirits sink, the blood her cheek forsook;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fears, who for his safety undertook;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She knew the virtue of the spells she gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She knew the force, and knew her lover brave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what’s a single champion to a host?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, scorning thus to see him tamely lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her strong reserve of secret arts she brings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And last, her never-failing song she sings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wonders ensue; among his gazing foes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The massy fragment of a rock he throws;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This charm in civil war engaged them all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By mutual wounds those earthborn brothers fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Greeks, transported with the strange success,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leap from their seats the conq’ror to caress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commend, and kiss, and clasp him in their arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So would the kind contriver of the charms;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But her, who felt the tenderest concern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honour condemns in secret flames to burn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Committed to a double guard of fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awed by a virgin’s and a princess’ name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thoughts are free, and fancy unconfined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She kisses, courts, and hugs him in her mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fav’ring powers her silent thanks she gives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By whose indulgence her loved hero lives.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One labour more remains, and, though the last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In danger far surmounting all the past;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That enterprise, by Fates, in store was kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make the dragon sleep, that never slept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose crest shoots dreadful lustre; from his jaws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A triple tire of forked stings he draws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fangs, and wings of a prodigious size:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was the guardian of the golden prize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet him, besprinkled with Lethaean dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fair enchantress into slumber threw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, to fix him, thrice she did repeat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rhyme, that makes the raging winds retreat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In stormy seas can halcyon seasons make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn rapid streams into a standing lake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the soft guest his drowsy eyelids seals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The unguarded golden fleece the stranger steals;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proud to possess the purchase of the toil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proud of his royal bride, the richer spoil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sea both prize and patroness he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lands triumphant on his native shore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="old-aeson-restored-to-youth" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Old Aeson Restored to Youth</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Medea, at the request of her husband, restores his aged father, Aeson, to the vigour and sprightliness of youth.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Aemonian matrons, who their absence mourn’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rejoice to see their prosp’rous sons reiurn’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rich curling fumes of incense feast the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hecatomb of voted victims dies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With gilded horns, and garlands on their head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the pomp of death, to the altar led.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Congratulating bowls go briskly round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Triumphant shouts in louder music drown’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid these revels, why that cloud of care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Jason’s brow? (to whom the largest share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mirth was due)⁠—his father was not there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aeson was absent, once the young and brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now crush’d with years, and bending to the grave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last withdrawn, and by the crowd unseen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pressing her hand (with starting sighs between),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He supplicates his kind and skilful queen.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O patroness, preserver of my life!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Dear when my mistress, and much dearer wife)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your favours to so vast a sum amount,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis past the power of numbers to recount;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, could they be to computation brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The history would a romance be thought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet, unless you add one favour more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Greater than all that you conferr’d before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But not too hard for love and magic skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your past are thrown away, and Jason’s wretched still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The morning of my life is just begun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my declining father’s race is run;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From my large stock retrench the long arrears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And add them to expiring Aeson’s years.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus spake the generous youth, and wept the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moved with the piety of his request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To his aged sire such filial duty shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So different from her treatment of her own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still endeav’ring her remorse to hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She check’d her rising sighs, and thus replied:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“How could the thought of such inhuman wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Escape,” said she, “from pious Jason’s tongue?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Does the whole world another Jason bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose life Medea can to yours prefer?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or could I with so dire a change dispense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hecate will never join in that offence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unjust is the request you make, and I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In kindness, your petition shall deny;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet she, that grants not what you do implore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall yet essay to give her Jason more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Find means to increase the stock of Aeson’s years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without retrenchment of your life’s arrears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Provided that the triple goddess join</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A strong confederate in my bold design.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus was her enterprise resolved; but still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three tedious nights are wanting to fulfil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The circling crescents of the increasing moon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, in the height of her nocturnal noon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Medea steals from court; her ankles bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her garments closely girt, but loose her hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus sallied, like a solitary sprite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She traverses the terrors of the night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Men, beasts, and birds, in soft repose lay charm’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No boist’rous wind the mountain-woods alarm’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor did those walks of love, the myrtle-trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of am’rous Zephyr hear the whisp’ring breeze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All elements chain’d in unactive rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sense but what the twinkling stars express’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To them (that only waked) she rears her arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus commences her mysterious charms.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She turn’d her thrice about, as oft she threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On her pale tresses the nocturnal dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then yelling thrice a most enormous sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her bare knee bended on the flinty ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O Night,” said she, “thou confidant and guide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of secrets, such as darkness ought to hide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye stars and moon, that, when the sun retires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Support his empire with succeeding fires;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou, great Hecate, friend to ny design;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Songs, mutt’ring spells, your magic forces join;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou, O Earth, the magazine that yields</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The midnight sorc’rer drugs; skies, mountains, fields;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye watery powers of fountain, stream, and lake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye sylvan gods, and gods of night, awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And generously your parts in my adventure take.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Oft, by your aid, swift currents I have led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through wand’ring banks, back to their fountain-head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transform’d the prospect of the briny deep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made sleeping billows rave, and raving billows sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made clouds or sunshine, tempests rise or fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stubborn, lawless winds obey my call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With mutter’d words disarm’d the viper’s jaw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up by the roots vast oaks and rocks could draw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make forests dance, and trembling mountains come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like malefactors, to receive their doom:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earth groan, and frighted ghosts forsake their tomb;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee, Cynthia, my resistless rhymes drew down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When tinkling cymbals strove my voice to drown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor stronger Titan could their force sustain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In full career, compell’d to stop his wain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor could Aurora’s virgin blush avail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With pois’nous herbs I turn’d their roses pale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fury of the fiery bulls I broke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their stubborn necks submitting to my yoke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the sons of Earth with fury burn’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their hostile rage upon themselves I turn’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brothers made with mutual wounds to bleed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by their fatal strife my lover freed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, while the dragon slept, to distant Greece,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through cheated guards, convey’d the golden fleece.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now to bolder action I proceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of such prevailing juices now have need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wither’d years back to their bloom can bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in dead winter raise a second spring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you’ll perform ’t⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You will; for lo! the stars, with sparkling fires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presage as bright success to my desires:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, now, another happy omen see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A chariot drawn by dragons waits for me.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With these last words she leaps into the wain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strokes the snakes’ necks, and shakes the golden rein;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That signal given, they mouni up is the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now beneath her fruitful Tempe lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose stores she ransacks; then to Crete she flies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There Ossa, Pelion, Othrys, Pindus, all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the fair ravisher a booty, fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tribute of their verdure she collects,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor proud Olympus’ height his plants protects.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some by the roots she plucks; the tender tops</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of others with her culling sickle crops.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor could the plunder of the hills suffice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down to the humble vales and meads she flies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pidanus, Amphrysus, the next rape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sustain, nor could Enipeus’ bank escape;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through Beebes marsh, and through the border ranged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose pasture Glaucus to a triton changed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now the ninth day, and ninth successive night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had wonder’d at the restless rover’s flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile her dragons, fed with no repast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But her exhaling simples’ od’rous blast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their tarnish’d scales and wrinkled skins had cast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last return’d before her palace gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quitting her chariot, on the ground she sate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sky her only canopy of state.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All conversation with her sex she fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shunn’d the caresses of the nuptial bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two altars next of grassy turf she rears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Hecate’s name, that youth’s inscription bears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With forest boughs and vervain these she crown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then delves a double trench in lower ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sticks a black-fleeced ram, that ready stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drench’d the ditches with devoted blood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New wine she pours, and milk from the udder warm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With mystic murmurs to complete the charm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And subterranean deities alarm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the stern king of ghosts she next applied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gentle Proserpine, his injured bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for old Aeson with the laws of fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They would dispense, and lengthen his short date.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus with repeated prayers she long assails</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The infernal tyrant, and at last prevails;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then calls to have decrepit Aeson brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stupifies him with a sleeping draught.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On earth his body, like a corpse, extends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then charges Jason and his waiting friends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To quit the place, that no unhallow’d eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into her art’s forbidden secrets pry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This done, the enchantress, with her locks unbound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About her altars trips a frantic round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Piecemeal the consecrated wood she splits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dips the splinters in the bloody pits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then hurls them on the piles; the sleeping sire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She lustrates thrice, with sulphur, water, fire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In a large caldron now the med’cine boils,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Compounded of her late collected spoils;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blending into the mesh the various powers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wonder-working juices, roots, and flowers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With gems i’ the eastern ocean’s cell refined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such as ebbing tides had left behind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To them the midnight’s pearly dew she flings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A screech-owl’s carcass, and ill-boding wings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor could the wizard wolf’s warm entrails ’scape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(That wolf who counterfeits a human shape).</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, from the bottom of her conj’ring bag,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snakes’ skins, and liver of a long-lived stag;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Last a crow’s head, to such an age arrived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he had now nine centuries survived.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These, and with these a thousand more that grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sundry soils, into her pot she threw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with a wither’d olive-bough she rakes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bubbling broth; the bough fresh verdure takes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Green leaves at first the perish’d plant surround,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which the next minute with ripe fruit were crown’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foaming juices now the brink o’erswell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The barren heath, where’er the liquor fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sprang out with vernal grass, and all the pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of blooming May. When this Medea spied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She cut her patient’s throat; the exhausted blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Recruiting with her new-enchanted flood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While at his mouth, and through his opening wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A double inlet her infusion found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His feeble frame resumes a youthful air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A glossy brown his hoary beard and hair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The meager paleness from his aspect fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in its room sprang up a florid red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all his limbs a youthful vigour flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His emptied arteries swell with fresh supplies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gazing spectators scarce believe their eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Aeson is the most surprised to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A happy change in body and in mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sense and constitution the same man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when his fortieth active year began.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Bacchus, who from the clouds this wonder view’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Medea’s method instantly pursued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his indulgent nurse’s youth renew’d.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="death-of-pelias" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Death of Pelias</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The daughters of Pelias, desirous of restoring their father to youth, apply to Medea to enable them to effect their purpose⁠—The enchantress, desirous of revenging the injuries formerly sustained by her husband, directs the credulous maidens to cut their father to pieces, and place his limbs in a caldron of boiling water⁠—On the arrival of Medea at Corinth, she finds her husband united in marriage to Glauce, the daughter of Creon⁠—This infidelity is severely punished by the injured wife, who contrives to destroy the bride and her father, whose palace she razes to the ground; and cruelly murders her own sons in the presence of Jason, who attempts to pursue her; but the princess makes her escape through the air, on a chariot drawn by winged dragons.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus far obliging love employ’d her art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now revenge must act a tragic part.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Medea feigns a mortal quarrel bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt her and the partner of her bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this pretence to Pelias’ court she flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who languishing with age and sickness lies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His guiltless daughters, with inveigling wiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And well-dissembled friendship, she beguiles:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strange achievements of her art she tells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Aeson’s cure, and long on that she dwells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till them to firm persuasion she has won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same for their old father may be done:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him they court her to employ her skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And put upon the cure what price she will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At first she’s mute, and with a grave pretence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of difficulty, holds them in suspense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then promises, and bids them from the fold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Choose out a ram, the most infirm and old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That so by facts their doubts may be removed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And first on him the operation proved.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A wreath-horn’d ram is brought, so far o’ergrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With years, his age was to that age unknown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sense too dull the piercing point to feel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scarce sufficient blood to stain the steel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His carcass she into a caldron threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With drugs whose vital qualities she knew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His limbs grow less, he casts his horns and years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tender bleatings strike their wond’ring ears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then instantly leaps forth a frisking lamb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seeks (too young to graze) a suckling dam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sisters, thus confirm’d with the success,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her promise with renew’d entreaty press.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To countenance the cheat, three nights and days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before experiment the enchantress stays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then into limpid water, from the springs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woods and ingredients of no force she flings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With antique ceremonies for pretence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rambling rhymes without a word of sense.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Meanwhile the king, with all his guards, lay bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In magic sleep, scarce that of death so sound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The daughters now are by the sorc’ress led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into his chamber, and surround his bed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Your father’s health’s concern’d, and can ye stay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unnatural nymphs, why this unkind delay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unsheath your swords, dismiss his lifeless blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I’ll recruit it with a vital flood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your father’s life and health are in your hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And can ye thus like idle gazers stand?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless you are of common sense bereft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If yet one spark of piety is left,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despatch a father’s cure, and disengage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The monarch from his toilsome load of age:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come, drench your weapons in his putrid gore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis charity to wound, when wounding will restore.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus urged, the poor deluded maids proceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betray’d by zeal to an inhuman deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in compassion, make a father bleed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, she who had the kindest, tend’rest heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is foremost to perform the bloody part.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet, though to act the butchery betray’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They could not bear to see the wounds they made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With looks averted, backward they advance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then strike and stab, and leave the blows to chance.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Waking in consternation, he essays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Welt’ring in blood) his feeble arms to raise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Environ’d with so many swords. “From whence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This barb’rous nsage? what is my offence?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What fatal fury, what infernal charm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Gainst a kind father does his daughters arm?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hearing his voice, as thunderstruck, they stopp’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their resolution and their weapons dropp’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Medea then the mortal blow bestows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, that perform’d, the tragic scene to close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His corpse into the boiling caldron throws.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, dreading the revenge that must ensue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High mounted on her dragon coach she few;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her stately progress through the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath her shady Pelion first she spies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Othrys, that above the clouds did rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With skilful Chiron’s cave, and neighb’ring ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For old Cerambus’strange escape renown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By nymphs deliver’d when the world was drown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who him with unexpected wings supplied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When deluged hills a safe retreat denied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aeolian Pitane on her left hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She saw, and there the statued dragon stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Ida’s grove, where Bacchus, to disguise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His son’s bold theft, and to secure the prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made the stolen steer a stag to represent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cocytus’ father’s sandy monument;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ând fields that held the murder’d sire’s remains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where howling Maera frights the startled plains:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Euryphilus’ high town, with towers defaced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Hercules and matrons more disgraced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sprouting horns, in signal punishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Juno or resenting Venus sent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Rhodes, which Phoebus did so dearly prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Jove no less severely did chastise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he the wizard native’s pois’ning sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That used the farmer’s hopeful crops to blight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In rage o’erwhelm’d with everlasting night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cartheia’s ancient walls come next in view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where once the sire almost a statue grew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wonder, which a strange event did move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His daughter turn’d into a turtle-dove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Hyrie’s lake and Tempe’s field o’erran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Famed for the boy who there became a swan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there enamour’d Phyllius, like a slave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perform’d what tasks his paramour would crave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For presents he had mountain-vultures caught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the desert a tame lion brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then a wild bull commanded to subdue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The conquer’d savage by the horns he drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, mock’d so oft, the treatment he disdains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the craving boy this prize detains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then thus in choler the resenting lad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Won’t you deliver him? You’ll wish you had.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sooner said, but, in a peevish mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leap’d from the precipice on which he stood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The standers-by were struck with fresh surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instead of falling, to behold him rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A snowy swan, and soaring to the skies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But dearly the rash prank his mother cost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who ignorantly gave her son for lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his misfortune wept, till she became</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lake, and still renown’d with Hyrie’s name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thence to Latona’s isle, where once was seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transform’d to birds, a monarch and his queen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far off she saw how old Cephisus mourn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His son, into a seal by Phoebus turn’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where, astonish’d at a stranger sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eumelus gazed on his wing’d daughter’s flight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Aetolian Pleuron she did next survey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where sons a mother’s murder did essay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sudden plumes the matron bore away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On her right hand, Cyllene, a fair soil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair, till Menephron there the beauteous hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attempted with foul incest to defile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her harness’d dragons now direct she drives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Corinth, and at Corinth she arrives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, if what old tradition tells be true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In former ages men from mushrooms grew.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But here Medea finds her bed supplied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>During her absence, by another bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, hopeless to recover her lost game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sets both bride and palace in a flame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor could a rival’s death her wrath assuage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor stopp’d at Creon’s family her rage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She murders her own infants, in despite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To faithless Jason, and in Jason’s sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet ere his sword could reach her, up she springs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Securely mounted on her dragon’s wings.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="story-of-aegeus" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Story of Aegeus</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">From Corinth Medea proceeds to Athens, where she becomes the wife of Aegeus, and attempts to poison his son Theseus: the hero, however, is fortunately recognised by his father, who compels his cruel queen to quit the Athenian territories⁠—In the meantime, Minos, king of Crete, threatens to invade Athens, in order to revenge the murder of his son Androgeus⁠—For this purpose he forms treaties of alliance with the neighbouring states, and endeavours to effect a league with Aeacus, the king of Aegina, who continues faithful to his compact with the Athenians, and entertains their ambassador Cephalus with hospitality and kindness.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>From hence to Athens she directs her flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Phinous, so renown’d for doing right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Periphas, and Polyphemon’s niece,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soaring with sudden plumes, amazed the towns of Greece.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here Aegeus so engaging she address’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That first he treats her like a royal guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then takes the sorc’ress for his wedded wife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The only blemish of his prudent life.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Meanwhile his son, from actions of renown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arrives at court, but to his sire unknown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Medea, to despatch a dangerous heir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(She knew him) did a pois’nous draught prepare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drawn from a drug, was long reserved in store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For desperate uses, from the Scythian shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from the Echydnaean monster’s jaws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Derived its origin, and this the cause⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through a dark cave a craggy passage lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ours ascending from the neiher skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which, by strength of hand, Alcides drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chain’d Cerberus, who lagg’d, and restiff grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his blear’d eyes our brighter day to view.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrice he repeated his enormous yell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which he scares the ghosts and startles hell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last outrageous (though compellid to yield),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sheds his foam in fury on the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, with its own, and rankness of the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Produced a weed, by sorcerers renown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strongest constitution to confound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call’d aconite, because it can unlock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All bars, and force its passage through a rock.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The pious father, by her wheedles won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presents this deadly potion to his son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who with the same assurance takes the cup,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the monarch’s health had drunk it up:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the very instant he applied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goblet to his lips, old Aegeus spied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The iv’ry-hilted sword that graced his side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That certain signal of his son he knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And snatch’d the bowl away; the sword he drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resolved, for such a son’s endanger’d life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sacrifice the most perfidious wife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revenge is swift; but her more active charms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A whirlwind raised, that snatch’d her from his arms;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While conjured clouds their baffled sense surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She vanishes from their deluded eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through the hurricane triumphant flies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The gen’rous king, although o’erjoy’d to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His son was safe, yet, bearing still in mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mischief by his treach’rous queen design’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The horror of the deed, and then how near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The danger drew, lie stands congeal’d with fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soon that fear into devotion turns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With grateful incense ev’ry altar burns;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proud victims, and unconscious of their fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stalk to the temple, there to die in state.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Athens never had a day been found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For mirth, like that grand festival renown’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Promiscuously the peers and people dine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Promiscuously their thankful voices join</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In songs of wit, sublimed by sprightly wine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To list ning spheres their joint applause they raise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus resound their matchless Theseus’ praise:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great Theseus! thee the Marathonian plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admires, and wears with pride the noble stain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the dire monster’s blood by valiant Theseus slain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That now Cromyon’s swains in safety sow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And reap their fertile field, to thee they owe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thee the infested Epidaurian coast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was clear’d, and now can a free commerce boast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The traveller his journey can pursue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With pleasure the late dreadful valley view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cry, “Here Theseus the grand robber slew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cephisus’ flood cries to his rescued shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The merciless Procrustes is no more:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In peace, Eleusis, Ceres’ rites renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since Theseus’ sword the fierce Cercyon slew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By him the torturer Sinis was destroy’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of strength (but strength to barb’rous use employ’d)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That tops of tallest pines to earth could bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus in pieces wretched captives rend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inhuman Scyron now has breathed his last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now Alcatho’s roads securely pass’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Theseus slain, and thrown into the deep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But earth nor sea his scatter’d bones would keep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, after floating long, a rock became,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still infamous with Scyron’s hated name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Fame to count thy acts and years proceeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy years appear but ciphers to thy deeds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thee, brave youth, as for our commonwealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We pray, and drink, in yours, the public health:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your praise the senate and plebeians sing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With your loved name the court and cottage ring:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You make our shepherds and our sailors glad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not a house in this vast city’s sad.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But mortal bliss will never come sincere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleasure may lead, but grief brings up the rear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While, for his son’s arrival, rev’lling joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aegeus and all his subjects does employ;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While they for only costly feasts prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His neighb’ring monarch, Minos, threatens war:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weak in land forces, nor by sea more strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But powerful in a deep-resented wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a son’s murder, arm’d with pious rage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet prudently, before he would engage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To raise auxiliaries resolved to sail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the powerful princes to prevail.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>First Anaphe, then proud Astypalaea gains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By presents that, and this by threats, obtains:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Low Mycone; Cymolus, chalky soil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tall Cythnos; Scyros; flat Seriphos’ isle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paros, with marble cliffs afar display’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impregnable Sithonia, yet betray’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a weak foe, by a gold-admiring maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, changed into a daw of sable hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still hoards un gold, and hides it from the view.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But as these islands cheerfully combine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others refuse to embark in his design.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now leftward, with an easy, sail, he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prosperous passage, to Oenopia’s shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enopia once, but now Aegina call’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his royal mother’s name install’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Aeacus, under whose reign did spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Myrmidons, and now their reigning king.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Down to the port, amid the rabble, run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The princes of the blood; with Telamon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peleus, the next, and Phocus, the third son.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Aeacus, although oppress’d with years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ask the cause of their approach appears.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>That question does the Gnossian’s grief renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sighs from his afflicted bosom drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, after a shori solemn respite made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The river of the hundred cities said:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Assist our arms, raised for a murder’d son;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this religious war no risk you’ll run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revenge the dead; for who refuse to give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rest to their urns, unworthy are to live.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What you request,” thus Aeacus replies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Not I, but truth and common faith denies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Athens and we have long been sworn allies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our leagues are fix’d, confed’rate are our powers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And who declare themselves their foes, are ours.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Minos rejoins: “Your league shall dearly cost;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet (mindful how much safer ’twas to boast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than there to waste his forces and his fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before in field with his grand foe he came)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Parts without blows; nor long had left the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere into port another navy bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Cephalus, and all his jolly crew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Aeacides their old acquaintance knew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The princes bid him welcome, and in state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conduct the hero to their palace gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, ent’ring, seem’d the charming mien to wear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when in youth he paid his visit there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his right hand an olive-branch he holds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, salutation pass’d, the chief unfolds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His embassy from the Athenian state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their mutual friendship, leagues of ancient date,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their common danger; ev’ry thing could wake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Concern, and his address successful make;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strength’ning his plea with all the charms of sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And those, with all the charms of eloquence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then thus the king: “Like suiters do you stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that assistance which you may command?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Athenians, all our listed forces use</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(They’re such as no bold service will refuse);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when ye’ve drawn them off, the gods be praised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fresh legions can within our isle be raised;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So stock’d with people, that we can prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both for domestic and for distant war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ours or our friends’ insulters to chastise.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Long may he flourish thus,” the prince replies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Strange transport seized me as I pass’d along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To meet so many troops and all so young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if your army did of twins consist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet among them my late acquaintance miss’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ev’n all that to your palace did resort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When first you entertain’d me at your court;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cannot guess the cause from whence could spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So vast a change.” Then thus the sighing king:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Illustrious guest, to my strange tale attend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sad beginning, but a joyful end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whole to a vast history would swell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall but half, and that confusedly, tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That race whom so deservedly you admired</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are all into their silent tombs retired:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They fell, and falling, how they shook my state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought may conceive, but words can ne’er relate.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="story-of-ants-changed-to-men" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Story of Ants Changed to Men</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">King Aeacus relates to Cephalus that a pestilence having formerly depopulated his territories, he entreated Jupiter to repeople his kingdom⁠—His request was granted, and, according to his desire, all the ants in an old oak were changed into men, and called by Aeacus Myrmidons, from a Greek word signifying an ant.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“A dreadful plague from angry Juno came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To scourge the land that bore her rival’s name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before her fatal anger was reveal’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And teeming malice lay as yet conceal’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All remedies we try, all med’cines use,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which nature could supply, or art produce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The unconquer’d foe derides the vain design,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And art and nature foil’d, declare the cause divine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“At first we only felt the oppressive weight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of gloomy clouds, then teeming with our fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lab’ring to discharge unactive heat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ere four moons alternate changes knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With deadly blasts the fatal south wind blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Infected all the air, and poison’d as it flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our fountains too a dire infection yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For crowds of vipers creep along the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, with polluted gore, and baneful steams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taint all the lakes, and venom all the streams.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The young disease with milder force began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And raged on birds and beasts, excusing man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lab’ring oxen fall before the plough;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The unhappy ploughmen stare, and wonder how:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tabid sheep, with sickly bleatings, pines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its wool decreasing as its strength declines:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The warlike steed, by inward foes compell’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neglects his honours, and deserts the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unnerved and languid, seeks a base retreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the manger groans, but wish’d a nobler fate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stags forget their speed, the boars their rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor can the bears the stronger herds engage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A general faintness does invade them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the woods and fields promiscuously they fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The air receives the stench, and, strange to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rav’nous birds and beasts avoid the prey;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The offensive bodies rot upon the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spread the dire contagion all around.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But now the plague, grown to a larger size,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Riots on man, and scorns a meaner prize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intestine heats begin the civil war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flushings first the latent flame declare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And breath inspired, which seem’d like fiery air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their black dry tongues are swell’d, and scarce can move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And short thick sighs from panting lungs are drove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They gape for air, with flattering hopes to abate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their raging flames, but that augments their heat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No bed, no covering, can the wretches bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on the ground, exposed to open air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They lie, and hope to find a pleasing coolness there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The suffering earth, with that oppression cursed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Returns the heat which they imparted first.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“In vain physicians would bestow their aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vain all their art, and useless all their trade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they, even they, who fleeting life recall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feel the same powers, and undistinguish’d fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any proves so daring to attend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sick companion, or his darling friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The officious wretch sucks in contagious breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his friend does sympathize in death.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And now the care and hopes of life are pass’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They please their fancies and indulge their taste:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At brooks and streams, regardless of their shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each sex, promiscuous, strives to quench their flame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor do they strive in vain to quench it there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thirst and life at once extinguish’d are.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus in the brooks the dying bodies sink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But heedless still the rash survivers drink.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“So much uneasy down the wretches hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They fly their beds, to struggle with their fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if decaying strength forbids to rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The victim crawls and rolls, till on the ground he lies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each shuns his bed as each would shun his tomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thinks the infection only lodged at home.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Here one, with fainting steps, does slowly creep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er heaps of dead, and straight augments the heap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another, while his strength and tongue prevail’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bewails his friend, and falls himself, bewail’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This, with imploring looks, surveys the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last dear office of his closing eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But finds the heavens implacable, and dies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What now, ah, what! empioy’d my troubled mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But only hopes my subjects’ fate to find?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What place soe’er my weeping eyes survey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There in lamented heaps the vulgar lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As acorns scatter when the winds prevail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or mellow fruit from shaken branches fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“You see that dome which rears its front so high.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis sacred to the monarch of the sky:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many there, with unregarded tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fruitless vows, sent up successless prayers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There fathers for expiring sons implored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there the wife bewail’d her gasping lord:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With pious offerings they appease the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they, ere yet the atoning vapours rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the altars fall, themselves a sacrifice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They fall while yet their hands the gums contain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their gums surviving, but their offerer’s slain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The destined ox, with holy garlands crown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prevents the blow, and feels an unexpected wound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I myself invoked the powers divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To drive the fatal pest from me and mine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When now the priest with hands uplifted stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prepared to strike, and shed the sacred blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gods themselves the mortal stroke bestow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The victim falls, but they impart the blow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce was the knife with the pale purple stain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no presages could be then obtain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From putrid entrails, where the infection reign’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Death stalk’d around with such resistless sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The temples of the gods his force obey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suppliants feel his stroke while yet they pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Go now,’ said he, ‘your deities implore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For fruitless aid, for I defy their power;’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with a cursed, malicious joy survey’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very altars, stain’d with trophies of the dead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The rest grown mad, and frantic with despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Urge their own fate, and so prevent the fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange madness that, when death pursued so fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To anticipate the blow with impious haste.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“No decent honours to their urns are paid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor could the graves receive the numerous dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, or they lay unburied on the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, unadorn’d, a needy funeral found:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All reverence past, the fainting wretches fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For funeral piles which were another’s right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unmourn’d they fall, for who survived to mourn?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sires and mothers unlamented burn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Parents and sons sustain an equal fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wandering ghosts their kindred shadows meet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dead a larger space of ground require,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor are the trees sufficient for the fire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Despairing under grief’s oppressive weight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sunk by these tempestuous blasts of fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘O Jove,’ said I, ‘if common fame says true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If e’er Aegina gave those joys to you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If e’er you lay enclosed in her embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fond of her charms, and eager to possess;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O father, if you do not yet disclaim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paternal care, nor yet disown the name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grant my petitions, and with speed restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My subjects numerous as they were before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or make me partner of the fate they bore.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I spoke, and glorious lightning shone around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rattling thunder gave a prosperous sound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘So let it be, and may these omens prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pledge,’ said I, ‘of your returning love.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“By chance a reverend oak was near the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sacred to Jove, and of Dodona’s race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where frugal ants laid up their winter meat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose little bodies bear a mighty weight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We saw them march along, and hide their store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And much admired their number and their power;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admired at first, but after envied more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of amazement, thus to Jove I pray’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘O grant, since thus my subjects are decay’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As many subjects to supply the dead.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray’d, and strange convulsions moved the oak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which murmur’d, though by ambient winds unshook:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My trembling hands and stiff-erected hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Express’d all tokens of uncommon fear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet both the earth and sacred oak I kiss’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scarce could hope, yet still I hoped the best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For wretches, whatsoe’er the Fates divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Expound all omens to their own design.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But now ’twas night, when even distraction wears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pleasing look, and dreams beguile our cares:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! the same vak appears before my eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor alterd in his shape nor former size;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As many ants the numerous branches bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same their labour and their frugal care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The branches too a like commotion found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shook the industrious creatures on the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who by degrees (what’s scarce to be believed)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A nobler form and larger bulk received,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the earth walk’d an unusual pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With manly strides and an erected face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their numerous legs and former colour lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The insects could a human figure boast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I wake, and, waking, find my cares again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the unperforming gods complain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And call their promise and pretences vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet in my court I heard the murm’ring voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of strangers, and a mix’d, uncommon noise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I suspected all was still a dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Telamon to my apartment came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Opening the door with an impetuous haste⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘O come,’ said he, ‘and see your faith and hopes surpass’d.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I follow, and, confused with wonder, view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those shapes which my presaging slumbers drew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw, and own’d, and call’d them subjects; they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confess’d my power, submissive to my sway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Jove, restorer of my race decay’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My vows were first with due oblations paid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I then divide, with an impartial hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My empty city, and my ruin’d land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To give the newborn youth an equal share,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And call them Myrmidons, from what they were.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You saw their persons, and they still retain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thrift of ants, though now transform’d to men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A frugal people, and inured to sweat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lab’ring to gain, and keeping what they get.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These, equal both in strength and years, shall join</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their willing aid, and follow your design,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the first southern gale that shall present</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fill your sails, and favour your intent.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With such discourse they entertain the day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The evening pass’d in banquets, sport, and play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, having crown’d the night with sweet repose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurora (with the wind at east) arose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now Pallas’ sons to Cephalus resort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Cephalus with Pallas’sons to court,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the king’s levee; him sleep’s silken chain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pleasing dreams beyond his hour detain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then the princes of the blood, in state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Expect and meet them at the palace gate.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="story-of-cephalus-and-procris" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Story of Cephalus and Procris</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Cephalus, in his turn, relates to Aeacus his adventures during his absence from his wife Procris, whose constancy he overcomes by profuse presents in the disguise of a stranger⁠—The matron flies from the presence of her husband, who at length prevails on her to return with promises of forgiveness⁠—Her jealousy is in like manner excited, and her unfounded suspicions direct her to an adjoining wood, where Cephalus is hunting; and he, mistaking her for a wild beast, transfixes her with a dart; and she expires in the arms of her agonized husband.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To the inmost courts the Grecian youths were led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And placed by Phocus on a Tyrian bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, soon observing Cephalus to hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dart of unknown wood, but arm’d with gold⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“None better loves,” said he, “the huntsman’s sport,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or does more often to the woods resort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet I that javelin’s stem with wonder view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too brown for box, too smooth a grain for yew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot guess the tree; but never art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did form, or eyes behold, so fair a dart!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The guest then interrupts him:⁠—“ ’Twould produce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still greater wonder, if you knew its use:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It never fails to strike the game, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comes bloody back into your hand again.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Phocus each particular desires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the author of the wondrous gifts inquires;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which the owner thus, with weeping eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sorrow for his wife’s sad fate, replies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“This weapon here, O prince! can you believe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This dart the cause for which so much I grieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shall continue to grieve on, till Fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Afford such wretched life no longer date?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would I this fatal gift had ne’er enjoy’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This fatal gift mỹ tender wife destroy’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Procris her name, allied in charms and blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fair Orithyia, courted by a god.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her father seal’d my hopes with rites divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But firmer love before had made her mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men call’d me bless’d, and bless’d I was indeed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The second month our nuptials did succeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When (as upon Hymettus’ dewy head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For mountain stags, my net betimes I spread)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurora spied, and ravish’d me away⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With rev’rence to the goddess, I must say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against my will, for Procris had my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor would her image from my thoughts depart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last, in rage, she cried, ‘Ingrateful boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go to your Procris, take your fatal joy:’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so dismiss’d me: musing, as I went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What those expressions of the goddess meant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand jealous fears possess me now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest Procris had profaned her nuptial vow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her youth and charms did to my fancy paint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lewd adult’ress, but her life a saint:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet I was absent long; the goddess too</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taught me how far a woman could be true.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurora’s treatment much suspicion bred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, who truly love ev’n shadows dread.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I straight inpatient for the trial grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What courtship back’d with richest gifts could do.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurora’s envy aided my design,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lent me features far unlike to mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in this disguise to my own house I came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all was chaste, no conscious sign of blame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thousand arts I scarce admittance found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then beheld her weeping on the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For her lost husband: hardly I retain’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My purpose, scarce the wish’d embrace refrain’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How charming was her grief! Then, Phocus, guess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What killing beauties waited on her dress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her constant answer, when my suit I press’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Forbear, my lord’s dear image guards this breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where’er he is, whatever cause detains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoe’er has his, my heart unmoved remains.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What greater proofs of truth than these could be?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet I persist, and urge my destiny.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length she found, when my own form return’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her jealous lover there, whose loss she mourn’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enraged with my suspicion, swift as wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fled at once from me and all mankind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so became, her purpose to retain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A nymph, and huntress in Diana’s train.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forsaken thus, I found my flames increase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I own’d my folly, and I sued for peace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was a fault, but not of guilt, to move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such punishment⁠—a fault of too much love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus I retrieved her to my longing arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many happy days possess’d her charms:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with herself she kindly did confer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What gifts the goddess had bestow’d on her:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fleetest greyhound, with this lovely dart⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I of both have wonders to impart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Near Thebes a savage beast, of race unknown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laid waste the field, and bore the vineyards down:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The swains fled from him; and, with one consent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our Grecian youth to chase the monster went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More swift than lightning he the toils surpass’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his course spears, men, and trees, o’ercast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We slipp’d our dogs, and last my Lelaps too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When none of all the mortal race would do:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He long before was struggling from my hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, ere we could unloose him, broke his bands:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That minute where he was we could not find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And only saw the dust he left behind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I climb’d a neighbouring hiil to view the chase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While in the plain they held an equal race:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The savagę now seems caught, and now, by force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To quit himself, nor holds the same straight course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, running counter, from the foe withdraws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with short turning cheats his gaping jaws;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he retrieves, and still so closely press’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’d fear at every stretch he were possess’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet for the gripe his fangs in vain prepare⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The game shoots from him, and he chops the air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cast my javelin then I took my stand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as the thongs were fitting to my hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While to the valley I o’erlook’d the wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before my eyes two marble statues stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, as pursued appearing at full stretch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This, barking after, and at point to catch:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some god their course did with this wonder grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That neither might be conquer’d in the chase.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sudden silence here his tongue suppress’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He here stops short, and fain would wave the rest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The eager prince then urged him to impart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fortune that attended on the dart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“First then,” said he, “past joys let me relate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For bliss was the foundation of my fate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No language can those happy hours express,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did from our nuptials me and Procris bless:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The kindest pair! What more could Heaven confer?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she was all to me, and I to her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had Jove made love, great Jove had been despised;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I my Procris more than Venus prized.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus while no other joy we did aspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We grew at last one soul and one desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth to the woods I went at break of day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(The constant practice of my youth), for prey;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor yet for servant, horse, or dog, did call⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I found this single dart to serve for all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With slaughter tired, I sought the cooler shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And winds that from the mountains pierced the glade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Come, gentle air,’ so was I wont to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Come, gentle air⁠—sweet Aura, come away.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This always was the burden of my song⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Come ’suage my flames⁠—sweet Aura, come along:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou always art most welcome to my breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I faint; approach, thou dearest, kindest guest!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These blandishments, and more than these, I said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(By Fate to unsuspected ruin led).</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Thou art my joy; for thy dear sake I love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each desert hill and solitary grove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When (faint with labour) I refreshment need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For cordials on thy fragrant breath I feed.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last a wandering swain in hearing came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, cheated with the sound of Aura’s name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thought I had some assignation made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to my Procris’ ear the news convey’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great love is soonest with suspicion fired:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She swoon’d, and with the tale almost expired.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Ah, wretched heart!’ she cried, ‘ah, faithless man!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then to curse the imagined nymph began:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet oft she doubts, oft hopes she is deceived,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chides herself, that ever she believed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her lord to such injustice could proceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till she herself were witness of the deed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next morn I to the woods again repair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, weary with the chase, invoke the air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Approach, dear Aura, and my bosom cheer:’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which a mournful sound did strike my ear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet I proceeded, till the thicket by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With rustling noise and motion, drew my eye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thought some beast of prey was shelter’d there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the covert threw my certain spear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From whence a tender sigh my soul did wound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Ah me!’ it cried, and did like Procris sound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Procris was there, too well the voice I knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the place with headlong horror flew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where I beheld her gasping on the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain attempting from the deadly wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To draw the dart, her love’s dear fatal gift!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My guilty arms had scarce the strength to lift</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The beauteous load: my silks and hair I tore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(If possible), to stanch the pressing gore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For pity begg’d her keep her flitting breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not to leave me guilty of her death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I entreat she fainted fast away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And these few words had only strength to say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all the sacred bonds of plighted love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all your reverence to the powers above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all that made me charming once appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all the truth for which you held me dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And last, by love, the cause through which I bleed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let Aura never to my bed succeed.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I then perceived the error of our fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And told it her, but found and told too late!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I felt her lower to my bosom fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And while her eyes had any sight at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On mine she fix’d them; in her pangs still press’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My hand, and sigh’d her soul into my breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, being undeceived, resign’d her breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methought more cheerfully, and smiled in death.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With such concern the weeping hero told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This tale, that none who heard him could withhold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From melting into sympathizing tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Aeacus with his two sons appears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom he commits, with their new-levied bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Fortune’s, and so brave a general’s, hands.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
