<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:poem">
		<section id="book-9" epub:type="division">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="story-of-achelous-and-hercules" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Story of Achelous and Hercules</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Achelous relates to Theseus the contest between himself and Hercules for the hand of Dejanira, who becomes the wife of the latter.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Theseus requests the god to tell his woes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence his maim’d brow, and whence his groans arose:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thus the Calydonian stream replied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With twining reeds his careless tresses tied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ungrateful is the tale, for who can bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When conquer’d, to rehearse the shameful war?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet I’ll the melancholy story trace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So great a conqueror softens the disgrace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor was it still so mean the prize to yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As great and glorious to dispute the field.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Perhaps you’ve heard of Dejanira’s name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all the country spoke her beauty’s fame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long was the nymph by numerous suitors woo’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each with address his envied hopes pursued:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I join’d the loving band to gain the fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reveal’d my passion to her father’s ear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their vain pretensions all the rest resign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alcides only strove to equal mine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He boasts his birth from Jove, recounts his spoils,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His stepdame’s hate subdued, and finish’d toils.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Can mortals then,’ said I, ‘with gods compare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold a god! mine is the watery care:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through your wide realms I take my mazy way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Branch into streams, and o’er the region stray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No foreign guest your daughter’s charms adores,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one who rises in your native shores.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let not his punishment your pity move:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is Juno’s hate an argument for love?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though you your life from fair Alcmena drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jove’s a feign’d father, or by fraud a true.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Choose then, confess thy mother’s honour lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or thy descent from Jove no longer boast.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“While thus I spoke, he look’d with stern disdain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor could the sallies of his wrath restrain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which thus break forth: ‘This arm decides our right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vanquish’d in words, be mine the prize in fight.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Bold he rush’d on. My honour to maintain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I fling my verdant garments on the plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My arms stretch forth, my pliant limbs prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with bent hands expect the furious war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er my sleek skin now gather’d dust he throws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yellow sand his mighty muscles strows:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft he my neck and nimble legs assails;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seems to grasp me, but as often fails;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each part he now invades with eager hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Safe in my bulk immoveable I stand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So when loud storms break high, and foam and roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against some mole that stretches from the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The firm foundation lasting tempests braves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Defies the warring winds and driving waves.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Awhile we breathe, then forward rush amain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Renew the combat, and our ground maintain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foot strove with foot, I, prone, extend my breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hands war with hands, and forehead forehead press’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus have I seen two furious bulls engage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inflamed with equal love and equal rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each claims the fairest heifer of the grove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And conquest only can decide their love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trembling herds survey the fight from far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till victory decides the important war:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three times, in vain, he strove my joints to wrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To force my hold, and throw me from his breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fourth he broke my gripe, that clasp’d him round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with new force he stretch’d me on the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Close to my back the mighty burden clung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if a mountain o’er my limbs were flung;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Believe my tale; nor do I, boastful, aim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By feign’d narration to extol my fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sooner from his arm I freedom get,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unlock my arms, that flow’d with trickling sweat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But quick he seized me, and renew’d the strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As my exhausted bosom pants for life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My neck he gripes, my knee to earth he strains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I fall, and bite the sand with shame and pains.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O’ermatch’d in strength, to wiles and arts I take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slip his hold in form of speckled snake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, when I writhed in spires my body round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or show’d my forky tongue with hissing sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smiles at my threats: ‘Such foes my cradle knew,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cries; ‘dire snakes my infant hand o’erthrew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dragon’s form might other conquests gain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To war with me you take that shape in vain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Art thou proportion’d to the hydra’s length,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who by his wounds received augmented strength?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He raised a hundred hissing heads in air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When one I lopp’d, up sprung a dreadful pair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By his wounds fertile, and with slaughter strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Singly I quell’d him, and stretch’d dead along.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What canst thou do, a form precarious, prone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rouse my rage with terrors not thy own?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said, and round my neck his hands he cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his straining fingers wrung me fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My throat he tortured close as pincers clasp;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain I strove to loose the forceful grasp.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus vanquish’d too, a third form still remains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Changed to a bull, my lowing fills the plains:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straight on the left his nervous arms were thrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my brindled neck, and tugg’d it down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then deep he struck my horn into the sand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fell’d my bulk along the dusty land:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor yet his fury cool’d; ’twixt rage and scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From my maim’d front he tore the stubborn horn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This, heap’d with flowers and fruits, the Naiads bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sacred to plenty, and the bounteous year.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He spoke, when lo! a beauteous nymph appears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Girt, like Diana’s train, with flowing hairs:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The horn she brings, in which all autumn’s stored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ruddy apples for the second board.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now morn begins to dawn, the sun’s bright fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gilds the high mountains, and the youths retire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor stay’d they till the troubled stream subsides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in its bounds with peaceful current glides;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Achelous in his oosy bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep hides his brow deform’d, and rustic head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No real wound the victor’s triumph show’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But his lost honours grieved the watery god;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet ev’n that loss the willow’s leaves o’erspread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And verdant reeds, in garlands, bind his head.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="death-of-nessus-the-centaur" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Death of Nessus the Centaur</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The centaur Nessus, who offers violence to Dejanira, is killed by the shafts of Hercules⁠—Before he expires, he presents a poisoned tunic to the woman he has injured, assuring her of its efficacy to recall the affections of a faithless husband.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This virgin too, thy love, O Nessus, found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her alone you owe the fatal wound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the strong son of Jove his bride conveys,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where his paternal lands their bulwarks raise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where from her slopy urn Evenus pours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her rapid current, swell’d by wintry showers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He came. The frequent eddies whirl’d the tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the deep rolling waves all pass denied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for himself, he stood unmoved by fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For now his bridal charge employ’d his cares.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strong-limb’d Nessus thus officious cried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For he the shallows of the stream had tried),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Swim thou, Alcides, all thy strength prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On yonder bank I’ll lodge thy nuptial care.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Aonian chief to Nessus trusts his wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All pale and trembling for her hero’s life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clothed as he stood in the fierce lion’s hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The laden quiver o’er his shoulder tied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For cross the stream his bow and club were cast),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift he plunged in: “These billows shall be pass’d,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said, nor sought where smoother waters glide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But stemm’d the rapid dangers of the tide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bank he reach’d, again the bow he bears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, hark! his bride’s known voice alarms his ears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nessus, to thee I call,” aloud he cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Vain is thy trust in flight, be timely wise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou monster double-shaped, my right set free:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou no rev’rence owe my fame and me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet kindred should thy lawless lust deny.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think not, perfidious wretch, from me to fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though wing’d with horses’ speed, wounds shall pursue.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift as his words the fatal arrow flew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The centaur’s back admits the feather’d wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through his breast the barbed weapon stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which when, in anguish, through the flesh he tore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From both the wounds gush’d forth the spumy gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mix’d with Lernaean venom; this he took,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor dire revenge his dying breast forsook;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His garment, in the reeking purple died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rouse love’s passion, he presents the bride.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="death-of-hercules" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Death of Hercules</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Dejanira sends the poisoned tunic of Nessus, by the hands of Lychas to recall the hero from the attractions of a rival.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now a long interval of time succeeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the great son of Jove’s immortal deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stepdame’s hate, had fill’d earth’s utmost round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He from Oechalia, with new laurels crown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In triumph was return’d: he rites prepares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the king of gods directs his prayers:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“When Fame (whom Falsehood clothes in Truth’s disguise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swells her little bulk with growing lies)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy tender ear, O Dejanira, moved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Hercules the fair Iole loved.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her love believes the tale; the truth she fears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his new passion, and gives way to tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flowing tears diffused her wretched grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why seek I thus, from streaming eyes, relief?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She cries; “indulge not thus these fruitless cares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The harlot will but triumph in thy tears:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let something be resolved, while yet there’s time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My bed not conscious of a rival’s crime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In silence shall I mourn, or loud complain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall I seek Calydon, or here remain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What though allied to Meleager’s fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I boast the honours of a sister’s name?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My wrongs, perhaps, now urge me to pursue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some desp’rate deed, by which the world shall view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How far revenge and woman’s rage can rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When welt’ring in her blood the harlot dies.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus various passions ruled by turns her breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She now resolves to send the fatal vest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Died with Lernaean gore, whose power might move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His soul anew, and rouse declining love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor knew she what her sudden rage bestows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When she to Lychas trusts her future woes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With soft endearments she the boy commands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bear the garment to her husband’s hands.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The unwitting hero takes the gift in haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er his shoulders Lerna’s poison cast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At first the fire with frankincense he strows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And utters to the gods his holy vows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the marble altar’s polish’d frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pours forth the grapy stream; the rising flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sudden dissolves the subtle pois’nous juice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which taints his blood, and all his nerves bedews.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wonted fortitude he bore the smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not a groan confess’d his burning heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length his patience was subdued by pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rends the sacred altar from the plain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oete’s wide forests echo with his cries:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now to rip off the deathful robe he tries.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where’er he plucks the vest, the skin he tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mangled muscles and huge bones he bares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(A ghastful sight!) or raging with his pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rend the sticking plague he tugs in vain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As the red iron hisses in the flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So boils the venom in his curdling blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now with the greedy flame his entrails glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And livid sweats down all his body flow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cracking nerves burnt up are burst in twain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lurking venom melts his swimming brain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, lifting both his hands aloft, he cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Glut thy revenge, dread emp’ress of the skies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sate with my death the rancour of thy heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look down with pleasure, and enjoy my smart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, if e’er pity moved a hostile breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For here I stand thy enemy profess’d),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take hence this hateful life, with tortures torn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inured to trouble, and to labours born.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death is the gift most welcome to my wo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such a gift a stepdame may bestow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was it for this Busiris was subdued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose barbarous temples reek’d with strangers’ blood?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press’d in these arms his fate Antaeus found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor gain’d recruited vigour from the ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did I not triple-form’d Geryon fell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or did I fear the triple dog of hell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did not these hands the bull’s arm’d forehead hold?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are not our mighty toils in Elis told?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do not Stymphalian lakes proclaim thy fame?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fair Parthenian woods resound thy name?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who seized the golden belt of Thermodon?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And who the dragon-guarded apples won?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could the fierce centaur’s strength my force with stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the fell boar that spoil’d the Arcadian land?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did not these arms the hydra’s rage subdue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who from his wounds to double fury grew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What if the Thracian horses, fat with gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who human bodies in their mangers tore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw, and with their barb’rous lord o’erthrew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What if these hands Nemaea’s lion slew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did not this neck the heavenly globe sustain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The female partner of the Thunderer’s reign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fatigued at length suspends her harsh commands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet no fatigue hath slack’d these valiant hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now new plagues pursue me, neither force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor arms, nor darts, can stop their raging course.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Devouring flame through my rack’d entrails strays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on my lungs and shrivell’d muscles preys.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet still Eurystheus breathes the vital air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What mortal now shall seek the gods with prayer?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="transformation-of-lychas-into-a-rock" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Transformation of Lychas Into a Rock</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Lychas is thrown into the Euboean Sea by his angry master, and is changed into a rock by the compassion of the gods.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The hero said; and, with the torture stung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Furious o’er Oete’s lofty hills he sprung.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stuck with the shaft, thus scours the tiger round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seeks the flying author of his wound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now might you see him trembling, now he vents</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His anguish’d soul in groans, and loud laments;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He strives to tear the clinging vest in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with uprooted forests strows the plain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now kindling into rage, his hands he rears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his kindred gods directs his prayers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Lychas, lo, he spies; who trembling flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a hollow rock conceal’d from view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had shunn’d his wrath. Now grief renew’d his pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His madness chafed, and thus he raves again:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Lychas, to thee alone my fate I owe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who bore the gift, the cause of all my wo.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The youth all pale with shiv’ring fear was stung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And vain excuses falter’d on his tongue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alcides snatch’d him, as with suppliant face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He strove to clasp his knees, and beg for grace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He toss’d him o’er his head with airy course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hurl’d with more than with an engine’s force:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far o’er the Euboean main aloof he flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hardens by degrees amid the skies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So show’ry drops, when chilly tempests blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thicken at first, then whiten into snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In balls congeal’d the rolling fleeces bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In solid hail result upon the ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus, whirl’d with nervous force through distant air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The purple tide forsook his veins with fear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All moisture left his limbs. Transform’d to stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In ancient days the craggy flint was known:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still in the Euboean waves his front he rears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still the small rock in human form appears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still the name of hapless Lychas bears.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="apotheosis-of-hercules" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Apotheosis of Hercules</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Hercules, finding his end approaching, bestows his bow and arrows on his friend Philoctetes, and expires on Mount Oeta; after which the hero is enrolled in the number of the gods.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But now the hero of immortal birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fells Oete’s forests on the groaning earth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pile he builds; to Philoctetes’ care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He leaves his deathful instruments of war;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him commits those arrows, which again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall see the bulwarks of the Trojan reign.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The son of Paeon lights the lofty pyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High round the structure climbs the greedy fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Placed on the top, thy nervous shoulders spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the Nemaean spoils, thy careless head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Raised on the knotty club, with look divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here thou, dread hero of celestial line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wert stretch’d at ease; as when a cheerful guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wine crown’d thy bowls, and flowers thy temples dress’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now on all sides the potent flames aspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crackle round those limbs that mock the fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sudden terror seized the immortal host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who thought the world’s profess’d defender lost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This when the Thunderer saw, with smiles he cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“ ’Tis from your fears, ye gods, my pleasures rise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Joy swells my breast, that my all-ruling hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er such a grateful people boasts command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That you my suffering progeny would aid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though to his deeds this just respect be paid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me you’ve obliged. Be all your fears forborne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Oetean fires do thou, great hero, scorn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who vanquish’d all things shall subdue the flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That part alone of gross material frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fire shall devour; while what from me he drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall live immortal, and its force subdue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, when he’s dead, I’ll raise to realms above;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May all the powers the righteous act approve!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any god dissent, and judge too great</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sacred honours of the heavenly seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ev’n he shall own his deeds deserve the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ev’n he reluctant shall at length comply.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The assembled powers assent. No frown till now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had mark’d with passion vengeful Juno’s brow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile whate’er was in the power of flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was all consumed; his body’s nervous frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more was known; of human form bereft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eternal part of Jove alone was left.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As an old serpent casts his scaly vest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Writhes in the sun, in youthful glory dress’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So when Alcides mortal mould resign’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His better part enlarged, and grew refined;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>August his visage shone; almighty Jove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his swift car his honour’d offspring drove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High o’er the hollow clouds the coursers fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lodge the hero in the starry sky.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="transformation-of-galanthis" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Transformation of Galanthis</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The delivery of Alcmena is effected by the sagacity of a servant-maid, named Galanthis, whose fidelity excites the displeasure of Juno, who converts her into a weasel.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Atlas perceived the load of heaven’s new guest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revenge still rancour’d in Eurystheus’ breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against Alcides’ race. Alcmena goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Iole, to vent maternal woes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here she pours forth her grief, recounts the spoils</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her son had bravely reap’d in glorious toils.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Iole, by Hercules’ commands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hyllus had loved, and join’d in nuptial bands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her swelling sides the teeming birth confess’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom Alcmena thus her speech address’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O may the gods protect thee, in that hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, midst thy throes, thou call’st the Ilithyian power!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May no delays prolong thy racking pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when I sued for Juno’s aid in vain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“When now Alcides’ mighty birth drew nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the tenth sign roll’d forward on the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sides extend with such a mighty load,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Jove the parent of the burden show’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could no more the increasing smart sustain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My horror kindles to recount the pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cold chills my limbs while I the tale pursue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now methinks I feel my pangs anew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seven days and nights amid incessant throes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fatigued with ills I lay, nor knew repose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When lifting high my hands, in shrieks I pray’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Implored the gods, and call’d Lucina’s aid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She came, but prejudiced, to give my fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sacrifice to vengeful Juno’s hate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She hears the groaning anguish of my fits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the altar at my door she sits.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er her left knee her crossing leg she cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then knits her fingers close, and wrings them fast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This stay’d the birth; in mutt’ring verse she pray’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mutt’ring verse the unfinish’d birth delay’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now with fierce struggles, raging with my pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Jove’s ingratitude I rage in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How did I wish for death! such groans I sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As might have made the flinty heart relent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now the Cadmeian matrons round me press,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Offer their vows, and seek to bring redress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the Theban dames Galanthis stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strong-limb’d, red-hair’d, and just to my commands:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She first perceived that all these racking woes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the persisting hate of Juno rose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As here and there she pass’d, by chance she sees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The seated goddess; on her close-press’d knees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her fast-knit hands she leans; with cheerful voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Galanthis cries, ‘Whoe’er thou art, rejoice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Congratulate the dame, she lies at rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length the gods Alcmena’s prayers have bless’d.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift from her seat the startled goddess springs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more conceal’d, her hands abroad she flings:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The charm unloosed, the birth my pangs relieved;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Galanthis’ laughter vex’d the power deceived.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fame says, the goddess dragg’d the laughing maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fast by the hair; in vain her force essay’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her grovelling body from the ground to rear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Changed to forefeet her shrinking arms appear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her hairy back her former hue retains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The form alone is lost; her strength remains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, since the lie did from her mouth proceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall from her pregnant mouth bring forth her breed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor shall she quit her long-frequented home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But haunt those houses where she loved to roam.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="fable-of-dryope" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Fable of Dryope</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Dryope, who incautiously plucks a branch of the lotus-tree for the amusement of her infant son, is herself transformed by the angry sylvan deities into a tree of the same species.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She said, and for her lost Galanthis sighs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the fair consort of her son replies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Since you a servant’s ravish’d form bemoan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kindly sigh for sorrows not your own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me (tears and grief permit) relate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A nearer wo, a sister’s stranger fate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No nymph of all Oechalia could compare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For beauteous form, with Dryope the fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her tender mother’s only hope and pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Myself the offspring of a second bride),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This nymph, compress’d by him who rules the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom Delphi and the Delian isle obey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Andraemon loved; and bless’d in all those charms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That pleased a god, succeeded to her arms.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“A lake there was, with shelving banks around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose verdant summit fragrant myrtles crown’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those shades, unknowing of the Fates, she sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the Naiads flowery garlands brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her smiling babe (a pleasing charge) she press’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between her arms, and nourish’d at her breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not distant far a watery lotus grows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spring was new, and all the verdant boughs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adorn’d with blossoms, promised fruits that vie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In glowing colours with the Tyrian die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of these she cropp’d, to please her infant son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I myself the same rash act had done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, lo! I saw (as near her side I stood)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The violated blossoms drop with blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the tree I cast a frightful look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trembling tree with sudden horror shook:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lotis the nymph (if rural tales be true),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As from Priapus’ lawless love she flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forsook her form; and fixing here became</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A flowery plant, which still preserves her name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“This change unknown, astonish’d at the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My trembling sister strove to urge the flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet first the pardon of the nymphs implored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And those offended sylvan powers adored:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when she backward would have fled, she found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her stiff’ning feet were rooted to the ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain to free her fasten’d feet she strove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as she struggles only moves above;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She feels the encroaching bark around her grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By slow degrees, and cover all below.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surprised at this, her trembling hand she heaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rend her hair; her hand is fill’d with leaves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where late was hair, the shooting leaves are seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rise, and shade her with a sudden green.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The child Amphisus, to her bosom press’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perceived a colder and a harder breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And found the springs, that ne’er till then denied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their milky moisture, on a sudden dried.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw, unhappy, what I now relate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stood the helpless witness of thy fate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Embraced thy boughs, the rising bark delay’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There wish’d to grow, and mingle shade with shade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold Andraemon and the unhappy sire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appear, and for their Dryope inquire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A springing tree for Dryope they find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And print warm kisses on the panting rind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prostrate, with tears their kindred plant bedew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And close embraced, as to the roots they grew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The face was all that now remain’d of thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more a woman, nor yet quite a tree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy branches hung with humid pearls appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From every leaf distils a trickling tear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And straight a voice, while yet a voice remains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus through the trembling boughs in sighs com plains:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘If to the wretched any faith be given,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I swear by all the unpitying powers of heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No wilful crime this heavy vengeance bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In mutual innocence our lives we led.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If this be false, let these new greens decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let sounding axes lop my limbs away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crackling flames on all my honours prey.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now from my branching arms this infant bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let some kind nurse supply a mother’s care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet to his mother let him oft be led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sport in her shades, and in her shades be fed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Teach him, when first his infant voice shall frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imperfect words, and lisp his mother’s name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hail this tree, and say with weeping eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Within this plant my hapless parent lies:”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when in youth he seeks the shady woods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O, let him fly the crystal lakes and floods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor touch the fatal flowers; but, warn’d by me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Believe a goddess shrined in every tree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sire, my sister, and my spouse, farewell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If in your breasts or love or pity dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Protect your plant, nor let my branches feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The browsing cattle, or the piercing steel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farewell! and since I cannot bend to join</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lips to yours, advance at least to mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My son, thy mother’s parting kiss receive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While yet thy mother has a kiss to give.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can no more, the creeping rind invades</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My closing lips, and hides my head in shades:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remove your hands; the bark shall soon suffice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without their aid, to seal these dying eyes.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She ceased at once to speak, and ceased to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the nymph was lost within the tree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet latent life through her new branches reign’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And long the plant a human heat retain’d.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="iolaus-restored-to-youth" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Iolaus Restored to Youth</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Hebe, at the request of Hercules, renews the youth of her son Iolaus.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>While Iole the fatal change declares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alcmena’s pitying hand oft wiped her tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grief too stream’d down her cheeks; soon sorrow flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rising joy the trickling moisture dries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo Iolaus stands before their eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A youth he stood, and the soft down began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er his smooth chin to spread, and promise man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hebe submitted to her husband’s prayers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instill’d new vigour, and restored his years.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="prophecy-of-themis" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Prophecy of Themis</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The events and consequences of the Theban war are foretold by Themis.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now from her lips a solemn oath had pass’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Iolaus this gift alone should taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not just Themis thus maturely said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Which check’d her vow, and awed the blooming maid):</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thebes is embroil’d in war. Capaneus stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invincible, but by the Thunderer’s hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ambition shall the guilty brothers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both rush to mutual wounds, and both expire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The reeling earth shall ope her gloomy womb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the yet breathing bard shall find his<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> tomb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The son<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a> shall bathe his hands in parents’ blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in one act be both unjust and good.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of home and sense deprived, where’er he flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Furies, and his mother’s ghost, he spies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wife the fatal bracelet shall implore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Phegeius stain his sword in kindred gore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Callirhoe shall then with suppliant prayer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prevail on Jupiter’s relenting ear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jove shall with youth her infant sons inspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bid their bosoms glow with manly fire.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="debate-of-the-gods" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Debate of the Gods</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The gods are forbidden by Jupiter to renew the youth of those mortals whom they favour.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When Themis this with prescient voice had spoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the gods a various murmur broke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dissension rose in each immortal breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one should grant what was denied the rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurora for her aged spouse complains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Ceres grieves for Jason’s freezing veins;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vulcan would Erichthonius’ years renew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her future race the care of Venus drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She would Anchises’ blooming age restore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A diff’rent care employ’d each heavenly power:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus various interests did their jars increase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Jove arose: he spoke; their tumults cease.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Is any rev’rence to our presence given,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then why this discord ’mong the powers of heaven?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who can the settled will of fate subdue?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas by the Fates that Iolaus knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A second youth. The Fates’ determined doom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall give Callirhoe’s race a youthful bloom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arms nor ambition can this power obtain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quell your desires; ev’n me the Fates restrain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could I their will control, no rolling years</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had Aeacus bent down with silver hairs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Rhadamanthus still had youth possess’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Minos with eternal bloom been bless’d.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jove’s words the synod moved; the powers give o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And urge in vain unjust complaint no more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since Rhadamanthus’ veins now slowly flow’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Aeacus and Minos bore the load;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Minos, who in the flower of youth and fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made mighty nations tremble at his name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Infirm with age, the proud Miletus fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vain of his birth, and in the strength of years;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now regarding all his realms as lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He durst not force him from his native coast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But you by choice, Miletus, fled his reign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy swift vessel plough’d the Aegean main;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Asiatic shores a town you frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which still is honour’d with the founder’s name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here you Cyanee knew, the beauteous maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As on her father’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a> winding banks she stray’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caunus and Byblis hence their lineage trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The double offspring of your warm embrace.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="passion-of-byblis" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Passion of Byblis</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Byblis falls passionately in love with her brother Caunus, who rejects her advances with horror⁠—The nymph becomes frantic with despair, and is converted into a fountain by the indulgent deities.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Let the sad fate of wretched Byblis prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dismal warning to unlawful love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One birth gave being to the hapless pair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But more was Caunus than a sister’s care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unknown she loved, for yet the gentle fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose not in flames, nor kindled to desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas thought no sin to wonder at his charms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hang on his neck, and languish in his arms.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus wing’d with joy fled the soft hours away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the fatal guilt on harmless Nature lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But love (too soon from piety declined)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Insensibly depraved her yielding mind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dress’d she appears, with nicest art adorn’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every youth, but her loved brother, scorn’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him alone she labour’d to be fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cursed all charms that might with hers compare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas she, and only she, must Caunus please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sick at her heart, yet knew not her disease:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She call’d him lord, for brother was a name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too cold and dull for her aspiring flame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when he spoke, if sister he replied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“For Byblis change that frozen word,” she cried.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet waking still she watch’d her struggling breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love’s approaches were in vain address’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till gentle sleep an easy conquest made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by her side the conqueror was laid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ah me!” she cried, “how monstrous do I seem!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why these vile thoughts, and this ill-omen’d dream?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Envy herself (’tis true) must own his charms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what is beauty in a sister’s arms?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! were I not that despicable she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How bless’d, how pleased, how happy, should I be!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But unregarded now must bear my pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And but in dreams my wishes can obtain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! gentle Caunus, quit thy hated line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or let thy parents be no longer mine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! that in common all things were enjoy’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But those alone who have our hopes destroy’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were I a princess, thou an humble swain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The proudest kings should rival thee in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It cannot be: alas! the dreadful ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is fix’d by fate, and he’s my brother still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hear me, ye gods! I must have friends in heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Jove himself was to a sister given:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what are their prerogatives above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the short liberties of human love?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fantastic thoughts! down, down, forbidden fires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or instant death extinguish my desires.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strict virtue, then, with thy malicious leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without a crime, I may a kiss receive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But say, should I in spite of laws comply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet cruel Caunus might himself deny.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet why should youth, and charms like mine, despair?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such fears ne’er startled the Aetolian pair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No ties of blood could their full hopes destroy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They broke through all for the prevailing joy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And who can tell but Caunus too may be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rack’d and tormented in his breast for me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like me, to the extremest anguish drove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like me, just waking from a dream of love?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But stay, O whither would my fury run?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What arguments I urge to be undone!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away! fond Byblis, quench these guilty flames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caunus thy love but as a brother claims;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet had he first been touch’d with love of me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The charming youth could I despairing see?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oppress’d with grief, and dying by disdain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! no; too sure I should have eased his pain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since, then, if Caunus ask’d me, it were done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asking myself, what dangers can I run?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But canst thou ask, and see that right betray’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Pyrrha down to thy whole sex convey’d?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That self-denying gift we all enjoy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wishing to be won, yet seeming to be coy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well, then, for once, let a fond mistress woo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The force of love no custom can subdue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This frantic passion he by words shall know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soft as the melting heart from whence they flow.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pencil then in her fair hand she held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By fear discouraged, but by love compell’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She writes, then blots, writes on, and blots again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Likes it as fit, then razes it as vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shame and assurance in her face appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a faint hope just yielding to despair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sister was wrote and blotted, as a word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which she, and Caunus too (she hoped) abhorr’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now resolved to be no more controll’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By scrup’lous virtue, thus her grief she told:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thy lover, gentle Caunus, wishes thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That health, which thou alone canst give to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O charming youth! the gift I ask bestow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere thou the name of the fond writer know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee without a name I would be known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since, knowing that, my frailty I must own.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet why should I my wretched name conceal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thousand instances my flames reveal?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wan looks and weeping eyes have spoke my pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sighs discharged from my heaved heart in vain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had I not wish’d my passion might be seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What could such fondness and embraces mean?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet (though extremest rage has rack’d my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And raging fires in my parch’d bosom roll)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be witness gods! how piously I strove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rid my thoughts of this enchanting love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But who could ’scape so fierce and sure a dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aim’d at a tender, a defenceless heart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! what maid could suffer I have borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere the dire secret from my breast was torn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee, a helpless, vanquish’d wretch I come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis you alone can save, or give my doom:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My life or death this moment you may choose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet think, O think, no hated stranger sues,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No foe; but one, alas! too near allied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wishing still much nearer to be tied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The forms of decency let age debate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And virtue’s rules by their cold morals state;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their ebbing joys give leisure to inquire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blame those noble flights our youth inspire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O pardon and oblige a blushing maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose rage the pride of her vain sex betray’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor let my tomb thus mournfully complain⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here Byblis lies, by her loved Caunus slain.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forced here to end, she with a falling tear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Temper’d the pliant wax which did the signet bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The curious cipher was impress’d by art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But love had stamp’d one deeper in her heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her page, a youth of confidence and skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Secret as night), stood waiting on her will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sighing, she cried, “Bear this, thou faithful boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To my sweet partner in eternal joy.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here a long pause her secret guilt confess’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when, at length, she would have spoken the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half the dear name lay buried in her breast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus, as he list’ned to her vain command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down fell the letter from her trembling hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The omen shock’d her soul. “Yet go,” she cried.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Can a request from Byblis be denied?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To the Maeandrian youth this message’s borne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The half-read lines by his fierce rage were torn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Hence,” he exclaim’d, “thou vile accomplice, hence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enjoy the triumph of thy great offence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy instant death will but divulge her shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or thy life’s blood should quench the guilty flame.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frighted, from threat’ning Caunus he withdrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the dreadful news to his lost mistress flew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sad repulse so struck the wounded fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her sense was buried in her wild despair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pale was her visage, as the ghastly dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her scared soul from the sweet mansion fled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet with her life renew’d, her love returns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And faintly thus her cruel fate she mourns:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“ ’Tis just, ye gods! was my false reason blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To write a secret of this tender kind?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With female craft, I should at first have strove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By dubious hints to sound his distant love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tried those useful, though dissembled, arts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which women practise on disdainful hearts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should have watch’d whence the black storm might rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere I had trusted the unfaithful skies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now on the rolling billows I am toss’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with extended sails on the blind shelves am lost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did not indulgent heaven my deem foretell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When from my hand the fatal letter fell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What madness seized my soul, and urged me on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take the only course to be undone?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could myself have told the moving tale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such alluring grace as must prevail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then had his eyes beheld my blushing fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My rising sighs, and my descending tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round his dear neck these arms I then had spread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, if rejected, at his feet been dead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If singly these had not his thoughts inclined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet all united would have shock’d his mind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps my careless page might be in fault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in a luckless hour, the fatal message brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Business and worldly thoughts might fill his breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes ev’n love itself may be an irksome guest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He could not else have treated me with scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Caunus was not of a tigress born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor steel, nor adamant, has fenced his heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like mine, ’tis naked to the burning dart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Away, false fears! he must, he shall be mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In death alone I will my claim resign:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis vain to wish my written crime unknown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for my guilt much vainer to atone.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repulsed and baffled, fiercer still she burns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Caunus, with disdain, her impious love returns.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw no end of her injurious flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fled his country to avoid the shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forsaken Byblis, who had hopes no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Burst out in rage, and her loose robes she tore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With her fair hands she smote her tender breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the wond’ring world her love confess’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er hills and dales, o’er rocks and streams she flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still in vain did her wild love pursue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wearied, at length, on the cold earth she fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now in tears alone could her sad story tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Relenting gods in pity fix’d her there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to a fountain turn’d the weeping fair.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="fable-of-iphis-and-ianthe" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Fable of Iphis and Ianthe</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">A poor man named Lygdus directs his wife to destroy her newborn child should it prove a female⁠–⁠The tenderness of a mother induces her to conceal the sex of her daughter, and Lygdus, at a fit age, provides a suitable partner for his supposed son, whose sex is changed by the interposition of the goddess Isis.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The fame of this, perhaps, through Crete had flown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Crete had newer wonders of her own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Iphis changed; for near the Gnossian bounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(As loud report the miracle resounds),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Phaestus dwelt a man of honest blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But meanly born, and not so rich as good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Esteem’d and loved by all the neighbourhood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, to his wife, before the time assign’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For childbirth came, thus bluntly spoke his mind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If heaven,” said Lygdus, “will vouchsafe to hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have but two petitions to prefer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Short pains for thee, for me a son and heir.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Girls cost as many throes in bringing forth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, when born, they prove of little worth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weak, puling things, unable to sustain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their share of labour, and their bread to gain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If, therefore, thou a creature shalt produce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of so great charges, and so little use</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Bear witness, heaven, with what reluctancy),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her helpless innocence I doom to die.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said; and tears the common grief display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of him who bade, and her who must obey.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yet Telethusa still persists, to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit arguments to move a father’s mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To extend his wishes to a larger scope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in one vessel not confine his hope.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lygdus continues hard: her time drew near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she her heavy load could scarcely bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When slumbering, in the latter shades of night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the approaches of returning light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She saw, or thought she saw, before her bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A glorious train, and Isis at their head:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her moony horns were on her forehead placed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yellow sheaves her shining temples graced;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mitre, for a crown, she wore on high;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dog and dappled bull were waiting by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Osiris, sought along the banks of Nile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silent god; the sacred crocodile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, last, a long procession moving on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With timbrels, that assist the labouring moon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her slumbers seem’d dispell’d, and, broad awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She heard a voice that thus distinctly spake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My votary, thy babe from death defend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor fear to save whate’er the gods will send.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delude with art thy husband’s dire decree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When danger calls, repose thy trust on me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And know thou hast not served a thankless deity.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This promise made, with night the goddess fled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With joy the woman wakes and leaves her bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Devoutly lifts her spotless hands on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prays the powers their gifts to ratify.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now grinding pains proceed to bearing throes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till its own weight the burden did disclose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas of the beauteous kind, and brought to light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With secrecy, to shun the father’s sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The indulgent mother did her care employ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pass’d it on her husband for a boy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nurse was conscious of the fact alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The father paid his vows as for a son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And call’d him Iphis, by a common name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which either sex with equal right may claim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Iphis his grandsire was; the wife was pleased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of half the fraud by Fortune’s favour eased.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The doubtful name was used without deceit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And truth was cover’d with a pious cheat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The habit show’d a boy, the beauteous face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With manly fierceness mingled female grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now thirteen years of age were swiftly run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the fond father thought the time drew on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of settling in the world his only son.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ianthe was his choice, so wondrous fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her form alone with Iphis could compare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A neighbour’s daughter of his own degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not more bless’d with fortune’s goods than he.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They soon espoused; for they with ease were join’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who were before contracted in the mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their age the same, their inclinations too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bred together, in one school they grew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus, fatally disposed to mutual fires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They felt, before they knew, the same desires;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Equal their flame, unequal was their care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One loved with hope, one languish’d in despair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, scarce refraining tears, “Alas,” said she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What issue of my love remains for me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How wild a passion works within my breast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With what prodigious flames am I possess’d!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could I the care of Providence deserve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven must destroy me, if it would preserve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that’s my fate, or sure it would have sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some usual evil for my punishment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not this unkindly curse, to rage and burn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where nature shows no prospect of return.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And yet no guards against our joys conspire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No jealous husband hinders our desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My parents are propitious to my wish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she herself consenting to the bliss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All things concur to prosper our design,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All things to prosper any love but mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven has been kind, as far as Heaven can be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our parents with our own desires agree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Nature, stronger than the gods above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Refuses her assistance to my love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sets the bar that causes all my pain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One gift refused makes all their bounty vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now the happy day is just at hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bind our hearts in Hymen’s holy band.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus lovesick Iphis her vain passion mourns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With equal ardour fair Ianthe burns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invoking Hymen’s name, and Juno’s power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To speed the work, and haste the happy hour.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She hopes, while Telethusa fears the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strives to interpose some new delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now feigns a sickness, now is in a fright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For this bad omen, or that boding sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But having done whate’er she could devise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And emptied all her magazine of lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The time approach’d, the next ensuing day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fatal secret must to light betray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Telethusa had recourse to prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She, and her daughter, with dishevell’d hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembling with fear, great Isis they adored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Embraced her altar, and her aid implored.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Fair queen, who dost on fruitful Egypt smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who sway’st the sceptre of the Pharian isle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sevenfold falls of disemboguing Nile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Relieve, in this our last distress,” she said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“A suppliant mother, and a mournful maid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, goddess, thou wert present to my sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reveal’d I saw thee by thy own fair light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw thee, in my dream, as now I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all thy marks of awful majesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The glorious train that compass’d thee around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heard the hollow timbrels’ holy sound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy words I noted, which I still retain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let not thy sacred oracles be vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Iphis lives, that I myself am free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From shame and punishment, I owe to thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On thy protection all our hopes depend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy counsel saved us, let thy power defend.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her tears pursued her words, and, while she spoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goddess nodded, and her altar shook;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The temple doors, as with a blast of wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were heard to clap; the lunar horns, that bind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brows of Isis, cast a blaze around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trembling timbrel made a murm’ring sound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Some hopes these happy omens did impart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth went the mother with a beating heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not much in fear, nor fully satisfied;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Iphis follow’d with a larger stride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whiteness of her skin forsook her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her looks imbolden’d with an awful grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her features and her strength together grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her long hair to curling locks withdrew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her sparkling eyes with manly vigour shone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Big with her voice, audacious was her tone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The maid becomes a youth. No more delay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your vows, but look, and confidently pay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their gifts the parents to the temple bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The votive tables this inscription wear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Iphis, the man, has to the goddess paid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vows that Iphis offer’d when a maid.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, when the star of day had shown his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Venus and Juno with their presence grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nuptial rites, and Hymen, from above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Descending to complete their happy love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gods of marriage lend their mutual aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the fond youth obtains the lovely maid.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
